.brand-consolidation-deprecated { display: none !important; }
(function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start':
new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0],
j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src=
'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl+ '&gtm_auth=EVfhr6k93Fl16jzaZVCafQ&gtm_preview=env-2&gtm_cookies_win=x';f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f);
})(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-WZ6MXMD');
@import url(/OAL/styles/site-styles.css);
Part 852 - Solicitation Provisions and Contract Clauses - Office of Acquisition and Logistics (OAL)
skip to page content
Attention A T users.  To access the menus on this page please perform the following steps.



		1. Please switch auto forms mode to off.

		2. Hit enter to expand a main menu option (Health, Benefits, etc).

		3. To enter and activate the submenu links, hit the down arrow.



	You will now be able to tab or arrow up or down through the submenu options to access/activate the submenu links.
Get help from Veterans Crisis Line
Locator
Contact
Search
Contact Us
FAQs
Ask a Question
Toll Free Numbers
Locator
Hospitals and Clinics
Vet Centers
Regional Benefits Offices
Regional Loan Centers
Cemetery Locations
Get help from Veterans Crisis Line
Search
Enter your search text
Button to start search
site map [a-z]
More VA
More VA
Health
Health Care Information
A-Z Health Topic Finder
My Health
e
Vet
Prescriptions Refills
Schedule a VA Appointment
Veterans Crisis Line
Mental Health
PTSD
Public Health
Community Care
Caregiver Support
Urgent Care
Benefits
General Benefits Information
Disability Compensation
Pension
GI Bill
®
Vocational Rehabilitation & Employment
Dependents' Educational Assistance
Survivor Benefits
Home Loans
Life Insurance
Appeals Modernization
Burials & Memorials
National Cemetery Information
Burial and Memorial Benefits
Find a Cemetery
Locate a Grave
Apply for Pre-need Eligibility
Schedule a Burial
Cemetery Grants
Cemetery Restoration
Veterans Legacy Memorial
NCA History Program
Veterans Legacy Program
About VA
Inside VA
Secretary of VA
Executive Biographies
Organizations
History
Budget and Performance
VA Plans, Budget, & Performance
Agency Financial Report (AFR)
Budget Submission
Recovery Act
Resources
Business
Congressional Affairs
Jobs
Benefits Booklet
Data & Statistics
VA Open Data
VA App Store
National Resource Directory
Veteran Service Organizations
Office of Accountability & Whistleblower Protection
Transparency
Media Room
Inside the Media Room
Public Affairs
News Releases
Speeches
Videos
Publications
National Observances
Veterans Day
Memorial Day
Celebrating America's Freedoms
Special Events
Adaptive Sports Program
Creative Arts Festival
Golden Age Games
Summer Sports Clinic
Training - Exposure - Experience (TEE) Tournament
Wheelchair Games
Winter Sports Clinic
Locations
Hospitals & Clinics
Vet Centers
Regional Benefits Offices
Regional Loan Centers
Cemetery Locations
Contact Us
FAQs
Ask a Question
Toll Free Numbers
Attention A T users.  To access the combo box on this page please perform the following steps.
                       1. Press the alt key and then the down arrow.
                       2. Use the up and down arrows to navigate this combo box.
                       3. Press enter on the item you wish to view. This will take you to the page listed.
I AM A...
Select One
Veteran
Active Duty Service Member
Caregiver/Family Member
Dependent/Survivor
National Guard/Reserve
Clinician/Researcher/Trainee
Menu
Menu
For Veterans
Benefit Information
Agent Orange
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
eBenefits
Benefit & Claim Status (Registration Required)
Disability Benefits Questionnaires (DBQ)
Unemployability/TDIU
Fiduciary Program
Pensions
Identification Card (VIC)
Claims
Benefits (Registration Required)
Appeals
Education
Veteran Rapid Retraining Assistance Program (VRRAP)
Web Automated Verification of Enrollment (W.A.V.E.) (Registration Required)
GI Bill
Survivors Education & Assistance Benefits (Chapter 35)
Vocational Rehabilitation
Veterans Education Assistance Program (VEAP)
Home Loans
Programs
Determine Your Eligibility
Certificate of Eligibility
Apply (Registration Required)
Status (Registration Required)
Veterans Information Portal (WebLGY) (Registration Required)
Insurance
Veterans Group Life Insurance (VGLI)
Service Members' Group Life Insurance (SGLI)
Family Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance (FSGLI)
Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance Traumatic Injury Protection (TSGLI)
Service-Disabled Veterans Insurance (S-DVI)
Veterans' Mortgage Life Insurance (VMLI)
Health Resources
Agent Orange
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
Dental Care
Blue Button
Download Your Own VA Medical Records
Order Hearing Aids
Batteries (for Hearing Aids & Other Devices)
VA Social Media Accounts
Manage Your Prescription Refills with My HealtheVet (Registration Required)
Disability Benefits Questionnaires (DBQ)
Mental Health
Appointments
Health (Please contact your local VA Medical Center)
Track Your Appointments with My HealtheVet (Registration Required)
Travel Pay/Reimbursement
Extended Care & Assisted Living
Aid & Attendance & Housebound
Caregivers
Community Living Centers (CLC)
Community Nursing Homes
Domiciliaries (Please contact your local VA Medical Center)
Homemaker & Home Health Aid Care
Hospice and Palliative Care
State Veterans Homes
Bill Pay
For Family Members & Spouses
CHAMPVA (Family Members Insurance)
eBenefits
Fiduciary Program
Burials & Memorials
Headstones, Markers, & Medallions
For Employees
Build Your Career
Education
Talent Management System (TMS) (Registration Required)
VA Acquisition Academy
Direct Deposit Sign-Up Form SF 1199A (PDF)
Human Resources
iCare
Personal Identification Verification (PIV) Card
Security Investigation Center/Background Investigations
Travel & Reimbursement
For Business
Doing Business with VA
Acquisition, Logistics, & Construction
Small & Veteran Business Programs
VetBiz Portal
Financial & Asset Enterprise Management
Security Investigation Center/Background Clearances
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)/Privacy Act Requests
VA Forms
Forms & Publications
Forms
Popular Forms
DD–214 — Report of Separation
21–4138 — Statement in Support of Claim (PDF)
22–1995 — Request for Change of Program or Place of Training (PDF)
22–1990 — Application for Education Benefits (PDF)
10-10ez — Health Benefits Renewal (PDF)
21–2680 — Exam for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance (PDF)
10–10ez — Application for Health Benefits
Publications
Jobs
Employment & Careers
Volunteer or Donate
Public & Intergovernmental Affairs
.va-footer-links-bottom:last-of-type {
           margin-bottom: 20px;
       }

       #footer-alert {
           position: fixed;
           bottom: 0;
           left:0;
           z-index:1;
           width: 100%;
           height: 60px;
           background-color: #f1f1f1;
       }
       
       #footer-alert p {
           margin: 8px auto;
           text-align: center;
           font-size: 1.6rem;
           font-weight: 700;
           color: #004795;
       }
       
       #footer-alert p a {
           color: #004795;
       }
       
       .va-banner-body > p > i {
           display: none;
       }

@media (min-width: 480px) {	
       
       .va-banner-body > p > i {
           display: inline-block;
           background-color: #ffffff;
           border-radius: 50%;
           margin: 0.4rem;
           padding: 0.8em;
       }
  
       #footer-alert p {
           margin: 5px auto;
           font-size: 1.2em;
       }
}
$(function() {
            document.getElementById("sub-footer").style.marginBottom = "60px";
  		    var alertMsg = "<div id=\"footer-alert\"><div class=\"va-banner-body\" role=\"banner\"><p><i class=\"fas fa-bullhorn icon-left\" aria-hidden=\"true\">&nbsp;</i><a href=\"https://www.va.gov/resources/the-pact-act-and-your-va-benefits\" title=\"PACT Act and your VA benefits\">Learn what the PACT Act means for your VA benefits <i class=\"fas fa-angle-double-right\" aria-hidden=\"true\"></i><\/a><\/p><\/div><\/div>";
		    $("body").append(alertMsg);
        });
VA
»
Office of Acquisition and Logistics (OAL)
»
VA Acquisition Regulation (VAAR)
»
							
						
					
          
					Part 852 - Solicitation Provisions and Contract Clauses
Office of Acquisition and Logistics (OAL)
Part 852 - Solicitation Provisions and Contract Clauses
.button {
  background-color: #2C6330; /* Green */
  border: none;
  color: white;
  padding: 15px 32px;
  text-align: center;
  text-decoration: none;
  display: inline-block;
  border-radius: 10px;
  font-size: 16px;
}

.button1 {
    background-color: #003f72;
    border: none;
    color: white;
    padding: 6px;
    text-align: center;
    text-decoration: none;
    display: inline-block;
    font-size: 1em;
	margin: 0px;
    cursor: pointer;
	border-radius: 4px;
	}

.button1:hover {
    background-color: #0083be;
	color: white;
	text-decoration: none;
	}
	
.dropbtn {
    background-color: #003f72;
    color: white;
    padding: 6px;
    font-size: 1em;
    border: none;
	margin: .1em;
    cursor: pointer;
	border-radius: 4px;
	}

.dropdown {
    position: relative;
    display: inline-block;
	}

.dropdown-content {
    display: none;
    position: absolute;
    background-color: #f9f9f9;
    min-width: 18rem;
	height: 500px;
	overflow-x: hidden;
	overflow-y: auto;
	text-wrap: pretty;
    box-shadow: 0px 8px 16px 0px rgba(0,0,0,0.2);
	}

.dropdown-content a, .dropdown-content a:visited, .dropdown-content a:active {
    color: black;
    padding: 8px 6px;
    text-decoration: underline;
    display: block;
	}

.dropdown-content a:hover {
	background-color: #f1f1f1;
	}

.dropdown:hover .dropdown-content {
    display: block;
	}

.dropdown:hover .dropbtn {
    background-color: #0083be;
	}

.button1, .dropbtn a:visited,  .dropbtn a:active {
	color: white !important;
	}

.table a:link {
	text-decoration: underline !important;
	}
	
.table a:hover {
	background-color: #f1f1f1;
	}
Access all VAAR Parts
Part 801—Department of Veterans Affairs Acquisition Regulation System
Part 802—Definitions of words and terms
Part 803—Improper business practices and personal conflicts of interest
Part 804—Administrative and information matters
Part 806—Competition requirements
Part 808—Required sources of supplies and services
Part 809—Contractor qualifications
Part 810—Market Research
Part 811—Describing agency needs
Part 812—Acquisition of Commercial Products and Commercial Services
Part 813—Simplified acquisition procedures
Part 814—Sealed bidding
Part 815—Contracting by negotiation
Part 816—Types of contracts
Part 817—Special contracting methods
Part 819—Small business programs
Part 822—Application of labor laws to Government acquisitions
Part 823—Environment, Energy and Water Efficiency, Renewable Energy Technologies, Occupational Safety, and Drug-Free Workplace
Part 824—Protection of privacy and freedom of information
Part 826—Other Socioeconomic Programs
Part 827—Patents, Data, and Copyrights
Part 828—Bonds and insurance
Part 829—Taxes
Part 831—Contract cost principles and procedures
Part 832—Contract financing
Part 833—Protests, disputes, and appeals
Part 835—Research and Development Contracting
Part 836—Construction and architect-engineer contracts
Part 837—Service contracting
Part 839—Acquisition of Information Technology
Part 841—Acquisition of utility services
Part 842—Contract administration and audit services
Part 843—Contract Modifications
Part 844—Subcontracting Policies and Procedures
Part 845—Government Property
Part 846—Quality assurance
Part 847—Transportation
Part 849—Termination of contracts
Part 852—Solicitation provisions and contract clauses
Part 853—Forms
Part 871—Vocational rehabilitation and employment programs
Part 873—Simplified procedures for health-care resources
Sec.
Title
Subpart 852.1—Instructions for Using Provisions and Clauses
852.101-70
Using Part 852.
852.102
Incorporating provisions and clauses.
Subpart 852.2—Text of Provisions and Clauses
852.201-70
Contracting Officer’s Representative.
852.203-70
Commercial Advertising.
852.203-71
[Reserved]
852.204-70
Personal Identity Verification of Contractor Personnel.
852.204-71
Information and Information Systems Security.
852.208-70
Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned and Veteran-Owned Small Business Evaluation Factors—Orders or BPAs.
852.208-71
Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned and Veteran-Owned Small Business Evaluation Factor Commitments—Orders and BPAs.
852.209-70
Organizational Conflicts of Interest.
852.211-70
Equipment Operation and Maintenance Manuals.
852.211-71
[Reserved]
852.211-72
Technical industry standards.
852.211-73 through 852.211-75
[Reserved]
852.211-76
Liquidated Damages—Reimbursement for Data Breach Costs.
852.212-70
[Reserved]
852.212-71
Gray Market and Counterfeit Items.
852.212-72
Maintenance Allowing Other-Than-New Parts.
852.214-70
[Reserved]
852.214-71
Restrictions on Alternate Item(s).
852.214-72
Alternate Item(s).
852.214-73
Alternate Packaging and Packing.
852.214-74
Marking of Bid Samples.
852.215-70
Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned and Veteran-Owned Small Business Evaluation Factors.
852.215-71
Evaluation Factor Commitments.
852.215-72
Notice of Intent to Re-Solicit.
852.216-70
[Reserved]
852.216-71
Economic Price Adjustment of Contract Price(s) Based on a Price Index.
852.216-72
Proportional Economic Price Adjustment of Contract Price(S) Based on a Price Index.
852.216-73
Economic Price Adjustment – State Nursing Home Care for Veterans.
852.216-74
Economic Price Adjustment - Medicaid Labor Rates.
852.216-75
Economic Price Adjustment - Fuel Surcharge.
852.216-76
Requirements—Supplement for Mortuary Services.
852.217-70
Contract Action Definitization.
852.219-70
VA Small Business Subcontracting Plan Minimum Requirements.
852.219-71
Notification of Competition Limited to Eligible 8(a) Participants.
852.219-72
Notification of Section 8(a) Direct Award.
852.219-73
VA Notice of Total Set-Aside for
Certified
Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses.
852.219-74
VA Notice of Total Set-Aside for
Certified
Veteran-Owned Small Businesses.
852.219-75
VA Notice of Limitations on Subcontracting—Certificate of Compliance for Services and Construction.
852.219-76
VA Notice of Limitations on Subcontracting—Certificate of Compliance for Supplies and Products.
852.222-70
Contract Work-Hours and Safety Standards–Nursing Home Care for Veterans.
852.222-71
Compliance with Executive Order 13899.
852.223-70
Instructions to Offerors-Sustainable Acquisition Plan.
852.223-71
Safety and Health.
852.228-70
Bond Premium Adjustment.
852.228-71
Indemnification and Insurance.
852.228-72
Assisting Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned and Veteran-Owned Small Businesses in Obtaining Bonds.
852.228-73
Indemnification of Contractor—Hazardous Research Projects.
852.229-70 through 852.229-71
[Reserved]
852.232-70
Payments Under Fixed-Price Construction Contracts (Without NAS-CPM).
852.232-71
Payments Under Fixed-Price Construction Contracts (Including NAS-CPM).
852.232-72
Electronic Submission of Payment Requests.
852.233-70
Protest Content/Alternative Dispute Resolution.
852.233-71
Alternate Protest Procedure.
852.235-70
Research Misconduct.
852.235-71
Protection of Human Subjects.
852.235-72
Animal Welfare.
852.235-73
Facilities.
852.235-74
Acknowledgement of Support and Disclaimer.
852.235-75
Scientific and Technical Reports.
852.236-70
[Reserved]
852.236-71
Specifications and Drawings for Construction.
852.236-72
Performance of Work by the Contractor.
852.236-73 through 852.236-78
[Reserved]
852.236-79
Contractor Production Report.
852.236-80
Subcontracts and Work Coordination.
852.236-81 through 852.236-89
[Reserved]
852.236-90
Restriction on Submission and Use of Equal Products.
852.236-91
[Reserved]
852.236-92
Notice to Bidders—Additive or Deductive Bid Line Items.
852.237-70
Indemnification and Medical Liability Insurance.
852.237-71
Nonsmoking Policy for Children’s Services.
852.237-72
Crime Control Act–Reporting of Child Abuse.
852.237-73
Crime Control Act–Requirement for Background Checks.
852.237-74
Non-Discrimination in Service Delivery.
852.237-75
Key Personnel.
852.237-76
Award to Single Offeror.
852.237-77
Area of Performance.
852.237-78
Performance and Delivery.
852.237-79
Subcontracting.
852.237-80
Health Department and Transport Permits.
852.239-70
Security Requirements for Information Technology Resources.
852.239-71
Information System Security Plan and Accreditation.
852.239-72
Information System Design and Development.
852.239-73
Information System Hosting, Operation, Maintenance, or Use.
852.239-74
Security Controls Compliance Testing.
852.239-75
Information and Communication Technology Accessibility Notice.
852.239-76
Information and Communication Technology Accessibility.
852.241-70
Disputes—Utility Contracts.
852.242-70
Government Construction Contract Administration.
852.242-71
Administrative Contracting Officer.
852.243-70
Construction Contract Changes-Supplement.
852.246-70
[Reserved]
852.246-71
Rejected Goods.
852.246-72
Frozen processed foods.
852.246-73
Noncompliance with Packaging, Packing and/or Marking Requirements.
852.246-74
[Reserved]
852.246-75
Warranties for construction - guarantee period services.
852.246-76
Purchase of Shellfish.
852.247-70
Determining transportation for Evaluation of Offers.
852.247-71
Delivery Location.
852.247-72
Marking Deliverables.
852.247-73
Packing for Domestic Shipment.
852.247-74
Advance Notice of Shipment.
852.247-75
Bills of Lading.
852.249-70
Termination for Default—Supplement for Mortuary Services.
852.252-70
Solicitation Provisions or Clauses Incorporated by Reference.
852.270-2 and 852.270-3
[Reserved]
852.271-70 and 852.271-71
[Reserved]
852.271-72
Time Spent by Counselee in Counseling Process.
852.271-73
Use and Publication of Counseling Results.
852.271-74
Inspection of Instruction, Counseling or Testing Operations.
852.271-75
[Reserved]
852.273-70
Late Offers.
852.273-71
Alternative Negotiation Techniques.
852.273-72
Alternative Evaluation.
852.273-73
Evaluation - Health-Care Resources.
852.273-74
Award Without Exchanges.
AUTHORITY:  38 U.S.C. 8127-8128 and 8151-8153; 40 U.S.C. 121(c); 41 U.S.C. 1121(c)(3); 41 U.S.C. 1303; 41 U.S.C 1702; and 48 CFR 1.301 through 1.304.
Subpart 852.1 - Instructions for Using Provisions and Clauses
852.101-70  Using Part 852.
Part 852 prescribes supplemental provisions and clauses to the FAR.  Provision and clause numbering are as prescribed in
FAR 52.101
(e.g., supplementary construction clauses under
Part 836
are numbered
852.236-71
,
852.236-72
, etc.).
852.102  Incorporating provisions and clauses.
(a) As authorized by
FAR 52.102(c)
, any 48 CFR Chapter 8 (VAAR) provision or clause may be incorporated in a quotation, solicitation, or contract by reference, provided the contracting officer complies with the requirements stated in
FAR 52.102(c)(1), (c)(2), and (c)(3)
.  To ensure compliance with
FAR 52.102(c)(1) and (c)(2)
, contracting officers shall insert the provision found at
852.252-70
, Solicitation provisions or clauses incorporated by reference, in full text in a quotation, solicitation, or contract if the quotation, solicitation, or contract incorporates by reference a
FAR
or 48 CFR Chapter 8 (VAAR) provision or clause that requires completion by the offeror or prospective contractor and submittal with the quotation or offer.
(b) For any
FAR
or 48 CFR chapter 8 (VAAR) provision or clause that requires completion by the contracting officer, the contracting officer shall, as a minimum, insert the title of the provision or clause and the paragraph that requires completion in full text in the quotation, solicitation, or contract.  The balance of the provision or clause may be incorporated by reference.
(c) When one or more
FAR
or 48 CFR Chapter 8 (VAAR) provisions, or portions thereof, are incorporated in a quotation or solicitation by reference, the contracting officer shall insert in the quotation or solicitation the provision found at
FAR 52.252-1
, Solicitation Provisions Incorporated by Reference.
(d) When one or more
FAR
or 48 CFR chapter 8 (VAAR) clauses, or portions thereof, are incorporated in a quotation, solicitation, or contract by reference, the contracting officer shall insert in the quotation, solicitation, or contract the clause found at
FAR 52.252-2
, Clauses Incorporated by Reference.
(e) If one or more
FAR
provisions or clauses, or portions thereof, are incorporated in a quotation, solicitation, or contract by reference, the contracting officer shall insert in the
FAR
provision or clause required by paragraph
(c)
or
(d)
of this section the following Internet address:
https://www.acquisition.gov/comp/far/index.html
(f) If one or more 48 CFR chapter 8 (VAAR) provisions or clauses, or portions thereof, are incorporated in a quotation, solicitation, or contract by reference, the contracting officer shall insert in the FAR provision or clause required by paragraph
(c)
or
(d)
of this section the following Internet address:
https://www.acquisition.gov/vaar
Subpart 852.2 - Text of Provisions and Clauses
852.201-70  Contracting Officer’s Representatives.
As prescribed in
801.604
, insert the following clause:
CONTRACTING OFFICER‘S REPRESENTATIVE (DEC 2022)
The Contracting Officer reserves the right to designate representatives to act for him/her in furnishing technical guidance and advice or generally monitor the work to be performed under this contract. Such designation will be in writing and will define the scope and limitation of the designee’s authority. A copy of the designation letter shall be furnished to the Contractor.
(End of clause)
852.203-70  Commercial Advertising.
As prescribed in
803.570-2
, insert the following clause:
COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING (MAY 2018)
The Contractor shall not make reference in its commercial advertising to Department of Veterans Affairs contracts in a manner that states or implies the Department of Veterans Affairs approves or endorses the Contractor’s products or services or considers the Contractor’s products or services superior to other products or services.
(End of clause)
852.203-71  [Reserved]
852.204-70  Personal Identity Verification of Contractor Personnel.
As prescribed in
804.1303
, insert the following clause:
PERSONAL IDENTITY VERIFICATION OF CONTRACTOR PERSONNEL (MAY 2020)
(a) The Contractor shall comply with current Department of Veterans Affairs policy for personal identity verification of all employees performing under this contract when frequent and continuing access to VA facilities or information systems is required.
(b) The Contractor shall insert this clause in all subcontracts when the subcontractor’s employees will require frequent and continuing access to VA facilities or information systems.
(End of clause)
852.204-71  Information and Information Systems Security.
As prescribed in
804.1903
, insert the following clause:
INFORMATION AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY (FEB 2023)
(a)
Definitions
. As used in this clause—
Business Associate
means an entity, including an individual (other than a member of the workforce of a covered entity), company, organization or another covered entity, as defined by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule, that performs or assists in the performance of a function or activity on behalf of the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) that involves the creating, receiving, maintaining, transmitting of, or having access to, protected health information (PHI). The term also includes a subcontractor of a business associate that creates, receives, maintains, or transmits PHI on behalf of the business associate.
Business Associate Agreement (BAA)
means the agreement, as dictated by the Privacy Rule, between VHA and a business associate, which must be entered into in addition to the underlying contract for services and before any release of PHI can be made to the business associate, in order for the business associate to perform certain functions or activities on behalf of VHA.
Information system
means a discrete set of information resources organized for the collection, processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination, or disposition of information whether automated or manual.
Information technology
(see
FAR 2.101
) also means Information and Communication Technology (ICT).
Information technology-related contracts
means those contracts which include services (including support services), and related resources for information technology as defined in
802.101
.
Privacy officer
means the VA official with responsibility for implementing and oversight of privacy related policies and practices that impact a given VA acquisition.
Sensitive personal information
means, with respect to an individual, any information about the individual maintained by VA, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Education, financial transactions, medical history, and criminal or employment history.
(2) Information that can be used to distinguish or trace the individual’s identity, including but not limited to name, social security number, date and place of birth, mother’s maiden name, or biometric records.
Security plan
means a formal document that provides an overview of the security requirements for an information system or an information security program and describes the security controls in place or planned for meeting those requirements.
VA Information Security Rules of Behavior for Organizational Users (VA National Rules of Behavior)
means a set of VA rules that describes the responsibilities and expected behavior of users of VA information or information systems.
VA sensitive information
means all VA data, on any storage media or in any form or format, which requires protection due to the risk of harm that could result from inadvertent or deliberate disclosure, alteration, or destruction of the information and includes sensitive personal information. The term includes information where improper use or disclosure could adversely affect the ability of VA to accomplish its mission, proprietary information, records about individuals requiring protection under various confidentiality provisions such as the Privacy Act and the HIPAA Privacy Rule, and information that can be withheld under the Freedom of Information Act. Examples of VA sensitive information include the following: individually-identifiable medical, benefits, and personnel information; financial, budgetary, research, quality assurance, confidential commercial, critical infrastructure, investigatory, and law enforcement information; information that is confidential and privileged in litigation such as information protected by the deliberative process privilege, attorney work-product privilege, and the attorney-client privilege; and other information which, if released, could result in violation of law or harm or unfairness to any individual or group, or could adversely affect the national interest or the conduct of Federal programs.
(b)
General
. Contractors, subcontractors, their employees, third-parties, and business associates with access to VA information, information systems, or information technology (IT) or providing and accessing IT-related goods and services, shall adhere to
VA Directive 6500
, VA Cybersecurity Program, and the directives and handbooks in the VA 6500 series related to VA information (including VA sensitive information and sensitive personal information and information systems security and privacy), as well as those set forth in the contract specifications, statement of work, or performance work statement. These include, but are not limited to,
VA Handbook 6500.6
, Contract Security; and VA
Directive
and
Handbook
0710, Personnel Security and Suitability Program, which establishes VA’s procedures, responsibilities, and processes for complying with current Federal law, Executive Orders, policies, regulations, standards and guidance for protecting VA information, information systems (see
802.101
, Definitions) security and privacy, and adhering to personnel security requirements when accessing VA information or information systems.
(c)
Access to VA information and VA information systems
.
(1) Contractors are limited in their request for logical or physical access to VA information or VA information systems for their employees, subcontractors, third parties and business associates to the extent necessary to perform the services or provide the goods as specified in the contracts, agreements, task, delivery or purchase orders.
(2) All Contractors, subcontractors, third parties, and business associates working with VA information are subject to the same investigative requirements as those of VA appointees or employees who have access to the same types of information. The level and process of background security investigations for contractors to access VA information and VA information systems shall be in accordance with VA
Directive
and
Handbook
0710, Personnel Security and Suitability Program.
(3) Contractors, subcontractors, third parties, and business associates who require access to national security programs must have a valid security clearance.
(4)
HIPAA Business Associate Agreement requirement
. Contractors shall enter into a Business Associate Agreement (BAA) with VHA, VA’s Covered Entity, when contract requirements and access to protected health information is required and when requested by the Contracting Officer, or the Contracting Officer’s Representative (COR) (see
VAAR 824.103-70
). Under the HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules, a Covered Entity (VHA) must have a satisfactory assurance that its PHI will be safeguarded from misuse. To do so, a Covered Entity enters into a BAA with a contractor (now the business associate), which obligates the business associate to only use the Covered Entity’s PHI for the purposes for which it was engaged, provide the same protections and safeguards as is required from the Covered Entity, and agree to the same disclosure restrictions to PHI that is required of the Covered Entity in situations where a contractor—
(i) Creates, receives, maintains, or transmits VHA PHI or that will store, generate, access, exchange, process, or utilize such PHI in order to perform certain health care operations activities or functions on behalf of the Covered Entity; or
(ii) Provides one or more of the services specified in the Privacy Rule to or for the Covered Entity.
(A)
Contractors or entities required to execute BAAs for contracts and other agreements become VHA business associates
. BAAs are issued by VHA or may be issued by other VA programs in support of VHA. The HIPAA Privacy Rule requires VHA to execute compliant BAAs with persons or entities that create, receive, maintain, or transmit VHA PHI or that will store, generate, access, exchange, process, or utilize such PHI in order to perform certain activities, functions or services to, for, or on behalf of VHA. There may be other VA components or staff offices which also provide certain services and support to VHA and must receive PHI in order to do so. If these components award contracts or enter into other agreements, purchase/delivery orders, modifications and issue governmentwide purchase card transactions to help in the delivery of these services to VHA, they will also fall within the requirement to obtain a satisfactory assurance from these contractors by executing a BAA.
(B)
BAA requirement flow down to subcontractors
. A prime Contractor required to execute a BAA shall also obtain a satisfactory assurance, in the form of a BAA, that any of its subcontractors who will also create, receive, maintain, or transmit VHA PHI or that will store, generate, access, exchange, process, or utilize such PHI will comply with HIPAA requirements to the same degree as the Contractor. Contractors employing a subcontractor who creates, receives, maintains, or transmits VHA PHI or that will store, generate, access, exchange, process, or utilize such VHA PHI under a contract or agreement is required to execute a BAA with each of its subcontractors which also obligates the subcontractor (i.e., also a business associate) to provide the same protections and safeguards and agree to the same disclosure restrictions to VHA’s PHI that is required of the Covered Entity and the prime Contractor.
(d)
Contractor operations required to be in United States
. Custom software development and outsourced operations must be located in the U.S. to the maximum extent practicable. If such services are proposed to be performed outside the continental United States, and are not otherwise disallowed by other Federal law, regulations or policy, or other VA policy or other mandates as stated in the contract, specifications, statement of work or performance work statement (including applicable Business Associate Agreements), the Contractor/subcontractor must state in its proposal where all non-U.S. services are provided. At a minimum, the Contractor/subcontractor must include a detailed Information Technology Security Plan, for review and approval by the Contracting Officer, specifically to address mitigation of the resulting problems of communication, control, and data protection.
(e)
Contractor/subcontractor employee reassignment and termination notification
. Contractors and subcontractors shall provide written notification to the Contracting Officer and Contracting Officer’s Representative (COR) immediately, and not later than four (4) hours, when an employee working on a VA information system or with access to VA information is reassigned or leaves the Contractor or subcontractor's employment on the cognizant VA contract. The Contracting Officer and COR must also be notified immediately by the Contractor or subcontractor prior to an unfriendly termination.
(f)
VA information custodial requirements
.
(1)
Release, publication, and use of data
. Information made available to a Contractor or subcontractor by VA for the performance or administration of a contract or information developed by the Contractor/subcontractor in performance or administration of a contract shall be used only for the stated contract purpose and shall not be used in any other way without VA’s prior written approval. This clause expressly limits the Contractor’s/subcontractor's rights to use data as described in Rights in Data—General,
FAR 52.227-14(d)
.
(2)
Media sanitization
. VA information shall not be co-mingled with any other data on the Contractors/subcontractor’s information systems or media storage systems in order to ensure federal and VA requirements related to data protection, information segregation, classification requirements, and media sanitization can be met (see
VA Directive 6500
, VA Cybersecurity Program).VA reserves the right to conduct scheduled or unscheduled on-site inspections, assessments, or audits of Contractor and subcontractor IT resources, information systems and assets to ensure data security and privacy controls, separation of data and job duties, and destruction/media sanitization procedures are in compliance with Federal and VA requirements. The Contractor and subcontractor will provide all necessary access and support to VA and/or GAO staff during periodic control assessments or audits.
(3)
Data retention, destruction, and contractor self-certification
. The Contactor and its subcontractors are responsible for collecting and destroying any VA data provided, created, or stored under the terms of this contract, to a point where VA data or materials are no longer readable or reconstructable to any degree, in accordance with
VA Directive 6371
, Destruction of Temporary Paper Records, or subsequent issue. Prior to termination or completion of this contract, the Contractor/subcontractor must provide its plan for destruction of all VA data in its possession according to
VA Directive 6500
, and VA Cybersecurity Program, including compliance with National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 800-88, Guidelines for Media Sanitization, for the purposes of media sanitization on all IT equipment. The Contractor must certify in writing to the Contracting Officer within 30 days of termination of the contract that the data destruction requirements in this paragraph have been met.
(4)
Return of VA data and information
. When information, data, documentary material, records and/or equipment is no longer required, it shall be returned to the VA (as stipulated by the Contracting Officer or the COR) or the Contractor/subcontractor must hold it until otherwise directed. Items returned will be hand carried, securely mailed, emailed, or securely electronically transmitted to the Contracting Officer or to the address as provided in the contract or by the assigned COR, and/or accompanying BAA. Depending on the method of return, Contractor/subcontractor must store, transport, or transmit VA sensitive information, when permitted by the contract using VA-approved encryption tools that are, at a minimum, validated under Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) 140-3 (or its successor). If mailed, Contractor/subcontractor must send via a trackable method (USPS, UPS, Federal Express, etc.) and immediately provide the Contracting Officer with the tracking information.No information, data, documentary material, records or equipment will be destroyed unless done in accordance with the terms of this contract and the VHA Records Control Schedule 10-1.
(5)
Use of VA data and information
. The Contractor/subcontractor must receive, gather, store, back up, maintain, use, disclose and dispose of VA information only in compliance with the terms of the contract and applicable Federal and VA information confidentiality and security laws, regulations and policies.If Federal or VA information confidentiality and security laws, regulations and policies become applicable to the VA information or information systems after execution of the contract, or if the National NIST issues or updates applicable FIPS or Special Publications (SP) after execution of this contract, the parties agree to negotiate in good faith to implement the information confidentiality and security laws, regulations and policies for this contract as a result of any updates, if required.
(6)
Copying VA data or information
. The Contractor/subcontractor shall not make copies of VA information except as authorized and necessary to perform the terms of the contract or to preserve electronic information stored on Contractor/subcontractor electronic storage media for restoration in case any electronic equipment or data used by the Contractor/subcontractor needs to be restored to an operating state. If copies are made for restoration purposes, after the restoration is complete, the copies must be appropriately destroyed.
(7)
Violation of information custodial requirements
. If VA determines that the Contractor has violated any of VA’s information confidentiality, privacy, or security provisions, it shall be sufficient grounds for VA to withhold payment to the Contractor or third-party or terminate the contract for default in accordance with
FAR part 49
or terminate for cause in accordance with
FAR 12.403
.
(8)
Encryption
. The Contractor/subcontractor must store, transport, or transmit VA sensitive information, when permitted by the contract, using cryptography, and VA-approved encryption tools that are, at a minimum, validated under FIPS 140-3 (or its successor).
(9)
Firewall and web services security controls
. The Contractor/subcontractor's firewall and web services security controls, if applicable, shall meet or exceed VA's minimum requirements. VA Configuration Guidelines are available upon request.
(10)
Disclosure of VA data and information
. Except for uses and disclosures of VA information authorized in a cognizant contract for performance of the contract, the Contractor/subcontractor may use and disclose VA information only in two other situations: (i) subject to paragraph (f)(10) of this section, in response to a court order from a court of competent jurisdiction, or (ii) with VA's prior written approval. The Contractor/subcontractor must refer all requests for, demands for production of, or inquiries about, VA information and information systems to the Contracting Officer for response. If the Contractor/subcontractor is in receipt of a court order or other request or believes it has a legal requirement to disclose VA information, that Contractor/subcontractor shall immediately refer such court order or other request to the Contracting Officer for response. If the Contractor or subcontractor discloses information on behalf of VHA, the Contractor and/or subcontractor must maintain an accounting of disclosures.Accounting of Disclosures documentation maintained by the Contractor/subcontractor will include the name of the individual to whom the information pertains, the date of each disclosure, the nature or description of the information disclosed, a brief statement of the purpose of each disclosure or, in lieu of such statement, a copy of a written request for a disclosure, and the name and address of the person or agency to whom the disclosure was made.The Contractor/subcontractor will provide its Accounting of Disclosures upon request and within 15 calendar days to the assigned COR and Privacy Officer. Accounting of disclosures should be provided electronically via encrypted email to the COR and designated VA facility Privacy Officer as provided in the contract, BAA, or by the Contracting Officer. If providing the Accounting of Disclosures electronically cannot be done securely, the Contractor/subcontractor will provide copies via trackable methods (UPS, USPS, Federal Express, etc.) immediately, providing the designated COR and Privacy Officer with the tracking information.
(11) Compliance with privacy statutes and applicable regulations. The Contractor/subcontractor shall not disclose VA information protected by any of VA’s privacy statutes or applicable regulations including but not limited to: the Privacy Act of 1974,
38 U.S.C. 5701
, confidential nature of claims,
38 U.S.C. 5705
, confidentiality of medical quality assurance records and/or
38 U.S.C. 7332
, confidentiality of certain health records pertaining to drug addiction, sickle cell anemia, alcoholism or alcohol abuse, or infection with human immunodeficiency virus or the HIPAA Privacy Rule. If the Contractor/subcontractor is in receipt of a court order or other requests for VA information or has questions if it can disclose information protected under the above-mentioned confidentiality statutes because it is required by law, that Contractor/subcontractor shall immediately refer such court order or other request to the Contracting Officer for response.
(g)
Report of known or suspected security/privacy incident
. The Contractor, subcontractor, third-party affiliate or business associate, and its employees shall notify VA immediately via the Contracting Officer and the COR or within one (1) hour of an incident which is an occurrence (including the discovery or disclosure of successful exploits of system vulnerability) that (A) actually or imminently jeopardizes, without lawful authority, the integrity, confidentiality, or the availability of its data and operations, or of its information or information system(s); or (B) constitutes a violation or imminent threat of violation of law, security policies, security procedures, or acceptable use policies. The initial notification may first be made verbally but must be followed up in writing within one (1) hour. See VA Data Breach Response Service at
https://www.oprm.va.gov/dbrs/about_dbrs.aspx
. Report all actual or suspected security/privacy incidents and report the information to the Contracting Officer and the COR as identified in the contract or as directed in the contract, within one hour of discovery or suspicion.
(1) Such issues shall be remediated as quickly as is practical, but in no event longer than __________ days [
Fill in: Contracting Officer fills in the number of days
]. The Contractor shall notify the Contracting Officer in writing.
(2) When the security fixes involve installing third party patched (e.g., Microsoft OS patches or Adobe Acrobat), the Contractor will provide written notice to VA that the patch has been validated as not affecting the systems within 10 working days.When the Contractor is responsible for operations or maintenance of the systems, they shall apply the security fixes within ____ [
Fill in: Contracting Officer fills in the number of days in consultation with requiring activity
].
(3) All other vulnerabilities shall be remediated in a timely manner based on risk, but within 60 days of discovery or disclosure. Contractors shall notify the Contracting Officer, and COR within 2 business days after remediation of the identified vulnerability. Exceptions to this paragraph (e.g., for the convenience of VA) must be requested by the Contractor through the COR and shall only be granted with approval of the Contracting Officer and the VA Assistant Secretary for Office of Information and Technology. These exceptions will be tracked by the Contractor in concert with the Government in accordance with
VA Directive 6500
and related VA Handbooks.
(h)
Security and privacy incident investigation
.
(1) The term “privacy incident” means the unauthorized disclosure or use of VA information protected under a confidentiality statute or regulation.
(2) The term "security incident" means an occurrence that (A) actually or imminently jeopardizes, without lawful authority, the integrity, confidentiality, or availability of information systems; or (B) constitutes a violation or imminent threat of violation of law, security policies, security procedures, or acceptable policies. The Contractor/ subcontractor shall immediately notify the Contracting Officer and COR for the contract of any known or suspected security or privacy incident, or any other unauthorized disclosure of sensitive information, including that contained in system(s) to which the Contractor/subcontractor has access.
(3) To the extent known by the Contractor/subcontractor, the Contractor/ subcontractor's notice to VA shall identify the information involved, the circumstances surrounding the incident (including to whom, how, when, and where the VA information or assets were placed at risk or compromised), and any other information that the Contractor/subcontractor considers relevant.
(4) With respect to unsecured PHI, the Business Associate is deemed to have discovered a security incident as defined above when the Business Associate either knew, or by exercising reasonable diligence should have been known to an employee of the Business Associate. Upon discovery, the Business Associate must notify VHA of the security incident immediately within one hour of discovery or suspicion as agreed to in the BAA.
(5) In instances of theft or break-in or other criminal activity, the Contractor/subcontractor must concurrently report the incident to the appropriate law enforcement entity (or entities) of jurisdiction, including the VA OIG and the VA Office of Security and Law Enforcement. The Contractor, its employees, and its subcontractors and their employees shall cooperate with VA and any law enforcement authority responsible for the investigation and prosecution of any possible criminal law violation(s) associated with any incident. The Contractor/subcontractor shall cooperate with VA in any civil litigation to recover VA information, obtain monetary or other compensation from a third party for damages arising from any incident, or obtain injunctive relief against any third party arising from, or related to, the incident.
(i)
Data breach notification requirements
.
(1) This contract may require access to sensitive personal information. If so, the Contractor is liable to VA for liquidated damages in the event of a data breach involving any VA sensitive personal information the Contractor/Subcontractor processes or maintains under the contract as set forth in clause
852.211-76
, Liquidated Damages—Reimbursement for Data Breach Costs.
(2) The Contractor/subcontractor shall provide notice to VA of a privacy or security incident as set forth in the Security and Privacy Incident Investigation section of this clause. The term 'data breach' means the loss, theft, or other unauthorized access, or any access other than that incidental to the scope of employment, to data containing sensitive personal information, in electronic or printed form, that results in the potential compromise of the confidentiality or integrity of the data. The Contractor shall fully cooperate with VA or third-party entity performing an independent risk analysis on behalf of VA. Failure to cooperate may be deemed a material breach and grounds for contract termination.
(3) The Contractor/subcontractor shall fully cooperate with VA or any Government agency conducting an analysis regarding any notice of a data breach or potential data breach or security incident which may require the Contractor to provide information to the Government or third-party performing a risk analysis for VA, and shall address all relevant information concerning the data breach, including the following:
(i) Nature of the event (loss, theft, unauthorized access).
(ii) Description of the event, including—
(A) Date of occurrence;
(B) Date of incident detection;
(C) Data elements involved, including any PII, such as full name, social security number, date of birth, home address, account number, disability code.
(D) Number of individuals affected or potentially affected.
(E) Names of individuals or groups affected or potentially affected.
(F) Ease of logical data access to the lost, stolen or improperly accessed data in light of the degree of protection for the data, e.g., unencrypted, plain text.
(G) Amount of time the data has been out of VA control.
(H) The likelihood that the sensitive personal information will or has been compromised (made accessible to and usable by unauthorized persons).
(I) Known misuses of data containing sensitive personal information, if any.
(J) Assessment of the potential harm to the affected individuals.
(K) Data breach analysis as outlined in 6500.2 Handbook, Management of Breaches Involving Sensitive Personal Information, as appropriate.
(L) Whether credit protection services may assist record subjects in avoiding or mitigating the results of identity theft based on the sensitive personal information that may have been compromised.
(M) Steps taken in response to mitigate or prevent a repetition of the incident.
(j)
Training
.
(1) All Contractor employees and subcontractor employees requiring access to VA information or VA information systems shall complete the following before being granted access to VA information and its systems:
(i) On an annual basis, successfully complete the VA Privacy and Information Security Awareness and VA Information Security Rules of Behavior training.
(ii) On an annual basis, sign and acknowledge (either manually or electronically) understanding of and responsibilities for compliance with the VA Information Security Rules of Behavior for Organizational Users, relating to access to VA information and information systems.
(iii) Successfully complete any additional cyber security or privacy training, as required for VA personnel with equivalent information system access.
(2) The Contractor shall provide to the Contracting Officer and/or the COR a copy of the training certificates and affirmation that VA Information Security Rules of Behavior for Organizational Users signed by each applicable employee have been completed and submitted within five (5) days of the initiation of the contract and annually thereafter, as required.
(3) Failure to complete the mandatory annual training and acknowledgement of the VA Information Security Rules of Behavior, within the timeframe required, is grounds for suspension or termination of all physical or electronic access privileges and removal from work on the contract until such time as the training and documents are complete.
(k)
Subcontract flow down
. The Contractor shall include the substance of this clause, including this paragraph (k), in subcontracts, third-party agreements, and BAAs, of any amount and in which subcontractor employees, third-party servicers/employees, and business associates will perform functions where they will have access to VA information (including VA sensitive information, i.e., sensitive personal information and protected health information), information systems, information technology (IT) or providing and accessing information technology-related contract services, support services, and related resources (see
VAAR 802.101
definition of information technology-related contracts).
(End of clause)
852.207-70  [Reserved]
Deviation per
Class Deviation
from VAAR parts 802, 806, 808, 810, 813, 819, 852, and 873, dated February 16, 2023, to implement the expansion of the certification requirement across all Federal agencies for Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses (SDVOSBs), and the transfer of the certification authority for both SDVOSBs and Veteran-Owned Small Businesses (VOSBs) from the VA to the Small Business Administration (SBA), effective January 1, 2023. The class deviation updates various VAAR parts to implement the new policy regarding the SBA Veteran Small Business Certification Program, the relevant SBA certification database, and removing the VA VIP database title and web address, and other pertinent information.
852.208-70  Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned and Veteran-Owned Small Business Evaluation Factors—Orders or BPAs.
As prescribed in
808.405-570
, insert the following clause:
SERVICE-DISABLED VETERAN-OWNED AND VETERAN-OWNED SMALL BUSINESS EVALUATION FACTORS—ORDERS OR BPAs (JAN 2023)
(a) In an effort to increase contracting opportunities for Veterans, depending on the evaluation factors included in the solicitation, VA will evaluate responses received based on the schedule Contractor’s
certified
service-disabled veteran-owned small business/veteran-owned small business (SDVOSB/VOSB) status; and/or their proposed use of
certified
SDVOSB/VOSB
listed in the SBA certification database on the SB Veteran Small Business Certification Program portal at
https://veterans.certify.sba.gov/
(see 13 CFR 128)
as subcontractors or teaming partners.
(b) To receive credit under this clause a contractor or subcontractor must be listed, at time of submission of offer/quotes and at time of award, as
a certified
SDVOSB/VOSB in the
SBA certification database on the SBA Veteran Small Business Certification Program portal at
https://veterans.certify.sba.gov/
(see 13 CFR 128) and be otherwise eligible in accordance with SBA size standards for the acquisition and limitations on subcontracting requirements set forth in SBA regulations (see 13 CFR 121, 125 and 128)
.
(c) A
certified
SDVOSB
listed in the SBA certification database
schedule holder will receive full credit, and a
certified
VOSB
listed in the SBA certification database
schedule holder will receive partial credit for the SDVOSB/VOSB status evaluation factor.
(d) Offerors other than SDVOSBs or VOSBs proposing to use
certified
SDVOSBs/VOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
as subcontractors/teaming partners, will receive some consideration under this evaluation factor. To receive consideration, offerors must provide in their proposals:
(1) The name(s) and contact information of the
certified
SDVOSB(s)/VOSB(s)
listed in the SBA certification database
with whom they intend to team or subcontract.
(2) A brief description of the proposed team or subcontractor(s) arrangement.
(3) The approximate dollar value of the proposed teaming arrangements or subcontract(s).
(4) Evidence of teaming partner/subcontractor’s
listing in the SBA certification database
.
(e) Pursuant to 38 U.S.C. 8127(g), any business concern that is determined by VA to have willfully and intentionally misrepresented a company’s SDVOSB/VOSB status is subject to debarment for a period of not less than five years. This includes the debarment of all principals in the business.
(End of clause)
852.208-71  Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned and Veteran-Owned Small Business Evaluation Factor Commitments—Orders and BPAs.
As prescribed in
808.405-570
, insert the following clause:
SERVICE-DISABLED VETERAN-OWNED AND VETERAN-OWNED SMALL BUSINESS EVALUATION FACTOR COMMITMENTS—ORDERS AND BPAs (JAN 2023) (DEVIATION)
(a) The Contractor agrees, if selected on the basis of
having certified
service-disabled veteran-owned small business (SDVOSB) or veteran-owned small business (VOSB) status
(see 13 CFR 128)
, to comply with the eligibility requirements in subpart
819.70
, including the limitation on subcontracting requirements at 13 CFR 125.6.
(b) The Contractor agrees, if selected for award on the basis of teaming/ subcontracting in accordance with
852.208-70
, Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned and Veteran-Owned Small Business Evaluation Factors—Orders and BPAs, to use the evaluated firm(s) as proposed or if approved by contracting officer to substitute one or more
certified
SDVOSB/VOSB
listed in the SBA certification database
for work of the same or similar value.
(c) Pursuant to 38 U.S.C. 8127(g), any business concern that is determined by VA to have willfully and intentionally misrepresented a company’s SDVOSB/VOSB status is subject to debarment for a period of not less than five years. This includes the debarment of all principals in the business.
(End of clause)
852.209-70  Organizational Conflicts of interest.
As prescribed in
809.507-1(b)
, insert the following provision:
ORGANIZATIONAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST (OCT 2020)
(a) It is in the best interest of the Government to avoid situations which might create an organizational conflict of interest or where the Offeror’s performance of work under the contract may provide the Contractor with an unfair competitive advantage.  The term “organizational conflict of interest” means that because of other activities or relationships with other persons, a person is unable to render impartial assistance or advice to the Government, or the person’s objectivity in performing the contract work is or might be otherwise impaired, or the person has an unfair competitive advantage.
(b) The Offeror shall provide a statement with its offer which describes, in a concise manner, all relevant facts concerning any past, present, or currently planned interest (financial, contractual, organizational, or otherwise) or actual or potential organizational conflicts of interest relating to the services to be provided under this solicitation.  The Offeror shall also provide statements with its offer containing the same information for any consultants and subcontractors identified in its proposal and which will provide services under the solicitation.  The Offeror may also provide relevant facts that show how its organizational and/or management system or other actions would avoid or mitigate any actual or potential organizational conflicts of interest.
(c) Based on this information and any other information solicited or obtained by the Contracting Officer, the Contracting Officer may determine that an organizational conflict of interest exists which would warrant disqualifying the Contractor for award of the contract unless the organizational conflict of interest can be mitigated to the Contracting Officer’s satisfaction by negotiating terms and conditions of the contract to that effect.  If the conflict of interest cannot be mitigated and if the Contracting Officer finds that it is in the best interest of the United States to award the contract, the Contracting Officer shall request a waiver in accordance with
FAR 9.503
.
(d) Nondisclosure or misrepresentation of actual or potential organizational conflicts of interest at the time of the offer or arising as a result of a modification to the contract, may result in the termination of the contract at no expense to the Government.
(End of provision)
852.211-70  Equipment Operation and Maintenance Manuals.
(a) As prescribed in
811.107-70
, insert the following clause:
EQUIPMENT OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE MANUALS (NOV 2018)
The Contractor shall follow standard commercial practices to furnish manual(s), handbook(s) or brochure(s) containing operation, installation, and maintenance instructions, including pictures or illustrations, schematics, and complete repair/test guides, as necessary, for technical medical equipment and devices, and/or other technical and mechanical equipment provided per CLIN(s) # ____ [
Contracting Officer insert CLIN information
].  The manuals, handbooks or brochures shall be provided in hard copy, soft copy or with electronic access instructions, consistent with standard industry practices for the equipment or device.  Where applicable, the manuals, handbooks or brochures will include electrical data and connection diagrams for all utilities.  The documentation shall also contain a complete list of all replaceable parts showing part number, name, and quantity required.
(End of clause)
852.211-71  [Reserved]
852.211-72  Technical Industry Standards.
As prescribed in
811.204-70
, insert the following clause:
TECHNICAL INDUSTRY STANDARDS (NOV 2018)
(a) The Contractor shall conform to the standards established by:  _______ [
Contracting Officer: Insert name of organization establishing the requirement, reference title, cite and date, e.g., United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Institutional Meat Purchase Specifications (IMPS), Series 100, Beef products, Jan 2010
] as to [
Contracting Officer: Insert item and CLIN, e.g., CLIN 0005 Ground Beef
].
(b) The Contractor shall submit proof of conformance to the standard.  This proof may be a label or seal affixed to the equipment or supplies, warranting that the item(s) have been tested in accordance with the standards and meet the contract requirement. Proof may also be furnished by the organization listed above certifying that the item(s) furnished have been tested in accordance with and conform to the specified standards.
(c) Offerors may obtain the standards cited in this provision by submitting a request, including the solicitation number, title and number of the publication to:  [Organization] _____________ [Mail or email address] ________________.
(d) The offeror shall contact the Contracting Officer if response is not received within two weeks of the request.
(End of clause)
852.211-73 through 852.211-75  [Reserved]
852.211-76  Liquidated Damages—Reimbursement for Data Breach Costs.
As prescribed in
811.503-70
, insert the following clause:
LIQUIDATED DAMAGES—REIMBURSEMENT FOR DATA BREACH COSTS (FEB 2023)
(a)
Definition
. As used in this clause, “contract” means any contract, agreement, order or other instrument and encompasses the definition set forth in
FAR 2.101
.
(b)
Non-disclosure requirements
. As a condition of performance under a contract, order, agreement, or other instrument that requires access to sensitive personal information as defined in
VAAR 802.101
, the following is expressly required—
(1) The Contractor, subcontractor, their employees or business associates shall not, directly or through an affiliate or employee of the Contractor, subcontractor, or business associate, disclose sensitive personal information to any other person unless the disclosure is lawful and is expressly permitted under the contract; and
(2) The Contractor, subcontractor, their employees or business associates shall immediately notify the Contracting Officer and the Contracting Officer’s Representative (COR) of any security incident that occurs involving sensitive personal information.
(c)
Liquidated damages
. If the Contractor or any of its agents fails to protect VA sensitive personal information or otherwise engages in conduct which results in a data breach, the Contractor shall, in place of actual damages, pay to the Government liquidated damages of __________ [
Contracting Officer insert amount
] per affected individual in order to cover costs related to the notification, data breach analysis and credit monitoring. In the event the Contractor provides payment of actual damages in an amount determined to be adequate by the Contracting Officer, the Contracting Officer may forgo collection of liquidated damages.
(d)
Purpose of liquidated damages
. Based on the results from VA’s determination that there was a data breach caused by Contractor’s or any of its agents’ failure to protect or otherwise engaging in conduct to cause a data breach of VA sensitive personal information, and as directed by the Contracting Officer, the Contractor shall be responsible for paying to the VA liquidated damages in the amount of _____ [
Contracting Officer insert amount
] per affected individual to cover the cost of the following:
(1) Notification related costs.
(2) Credit monitoring reports.
(3) Data breach analysis and impact.
(4) Fraud alerts.
(5) Identity theft insurance.
(e) Relationship to termination clause, if applicable. If the Government terminates this contract, purchase order, or agreement, in whole or in part under clause
52.249-8
, Default—Fixed-Price Supply and Service, or any other related FAR or VAAR clause included in the contract, in addition to the required liquidated damages for data breach-related expenses specified in paragraph (c) above, the Contractor is liable for excess costs for those supplies and services for repurchase as may be required under the Termination clause.
(End of clause)
Alternate I
(FEB 2023). In commercial products or commercial services acquisitions awarded under the procedures of
FAR part 8
or
12
, substitute this paragraph (e) in lieu of paragraph (e) in the basic clause:
(e)
Relationship to termination clause, if applicable
.If the Government terminates this contract in whole or in part under the Termination for cause paragraph, FAR
52.212-4(m)
, Contract Terms and Conditions—Commercial Products and Commercial Services, the Contractor is liable for damages accruing until the Government reasonably obtains delivery or performance of similar supplies or services. These damages are in addition to costs of repurchase as may be required under the Termination clause.
Alternate II
(FEB 2023). In simplified acquisitions exceeding the micro-purchase threshold that are for other than commercial products or commercial services awarded under the procedures of
FAR part 13
(see
FAR 13.302-5(d)(1)
and the clause at
FAR 52.213-4
), substitute this paragraph (e) in lieu of paragraph (e) in the basic clause:
(e)
Relationship to termination clause, if applicable
.If the Government terminates this contract in whole or in part under the Termination for cause paragraph,
FAR 52.213-4(g)
, Terms and Conditions – Simplified Acquisitions (Other Than Commercial Products and Commercial Services), or any other applicable FAR or VAAR clause, the Contractor is liable for damages accruing until the Government reasonably obtains delivery or performance of similar supplies or services. These damages are in addition to costs of repurchase as may be required under the Termination clause.
852.212-70  [Reserved]
852.212-71  Gray Market and Counterfeit Items.
As prescribed in
812.301(f)
, insert the following clause in solicitations and contracts for new medical and information technology equipment:
GRAY MARKET AND COUNTERFEIT ITEMS (FEB 2023)
(a) No used, refurbished, or remanufactured supplies or equipment/parts shall be provided. This procurement is for new Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) items only. No gray market items shall be provided. Gray market items are OEM goods intentionally or unintentionally sold outside an authorized sales territory or sold by non-authorized dealers in an authorized sales territory.
(b) No counterfeit supplies or equipment/parts shall be provided. Counterfeit items include unlawful or unauthorized reproductions, substitutions, or alterations that have been mismarked, misidentified, or otherwise misrepresented to be an authentic, unmodified item from the original manufacturer, or a source with the express written authority of the original manufacturer or current design activity, including an authorized aftermarket manufacturer. Unlawful or unauthorized substitutions include used items represented as new, or the false identification of grade, serial number, lot number, date code, or performance characteristics.
(c) Vendor shall be an OEM, authorized dealer, authorized distributor, or authorized reseller for the proposed equipment/system, verified by an authorization letter or other documents from the OEM. All software licensing, warranty and service associated with the equipment/system shall be in accordance with the OEM terms and conditions.
(End of clause)
852.212-72  Gray Market and Counterfeit Items—Information Technology Maintenance Allowing Other-Than-New Parts.
As prescribed in
812.301(f)
, insert the following clause:
GRAY MARKET AND COUNTERFEIT ITEMS—INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MAINTENANCE ALLOWING OTHER-THAN-NEW PARTS (FEB 2023)
(a) Used, refurbished, or remanufactured parts may be provided. No gray market supplies or equipment shall be provided. Gray market items are Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) goods intentionally or unintentionally sold outside an authorized sales territory or sold by non-authorized dealers in an authorized sales territory.
(b) No counterfeit supplies or equipment shall be provided. Counterfeit items include unlawful or unauthorized reproductions, substitutions, or alterations that have been mismarked, misidentified, or otherwise misrepresented to be an authentic, unmodified item from the original manufacturer, or a source with the express written authority of the original manufacturer or current design activity, including an authorized aftermarket manufacturer. Unlawful or unauthorized substitutions include used items represented as new, or the false identification of grade, serial number, lot number, date code, or performance characteristics.
(c) Vendor shall be an OEM, authorized dealer, authorized distributor, or authorized reseller for the proposed equipment/system, verified by an authorization letter or other documents from the OEM.All software licensing, warranty and service associated with the equipment/system shall be in accordance with the OEM terms and conditions.
(End of clause)
852.214-70  [Reserved]
852.214-71  Restrictions on Alternate Item(s).
As prescribed in
814.201-6(a)(1)
, insert the following provision:
RESTRICTIONS ON ALTERNATE ITEM(S) (MAY 2018)
Bids on [  ]
*
will be considered only if acceptable bids on [  ]
**
are not received or do not satisfy the total requirement.
(End of provision)
*Contracting officer will insert an alternate item that is considered acceptable.
**Contracting officer will insert the required item and item number.
852.214-72  Alternate Item(s).
As prescribed in
814.201-6(a)(2)
, insert the following provision:
ALTERNATE ITEM(S) (MAY 2018)
Bids on [  ]
*
will be given equal consideration along with bids on [  ]
**
and any such bids received may be accepted if to the advantage of the Government.  Tie bids will be decided in favor of [  ].
**
(End of provision)
*Contracting officer will insert an alternate item that is considered acceptable.
**Contracting officer will insert the required item and item number.
852.214-73  Alternate Packaging and Packing.
As prescribed in
814.201-6(a)(3)
, insert the following provision:
ALTERNATE PACKAGING AND PACKING (MAY 2018)
The bidders offer must clearly indicate the quantity, package size, unit, or other different feature upon which the quote is made.  Evaluation of the alternate or multiple alternates will be made on a common denominator such as per ounce, per pound, etc., basis.
(End of provision)
852.214-74  Marking of Bid Samples.
As prescribed in
814.201-6(b)
, insert the following provision:
MARKING OF BID SAMPLES (MAY 2018)
Any bid sample(s) furnished must be in the quantities specified in the solicitation.  Cases or packages containing any bid sample(s) must be plainly marked “Bid Sample(s)” with the complete lettering/numbering and description of the related bit item(s), the number of the Invitation for Bids, and the name of the bidder submitting the bid sample(s).
(End of provision)
Deviation per
Class Deviation
from VAAR parts 802, 806, 808, 810, 813, 819, 852, and 873, dated February 16, 2023, to implement the expansion of the certification requirement across all Federal agencies for Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses (SDVOSBs), and the transfer of the certification authority for both SDVOSBs and Veteran-Owned Small Businesses (VOSBs) from the VA to the Small Business Administration (SBA), effective January 1, 2023. The class deviation updates various VAAR parts to implement the new policy regarding the SBA Veteran Small Business Certification Program, the relevant SBA certification database, and removing the VA VIP database title and web address, and other pertinent information.
852.215-70  Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned and Veteran-Owned Small Business Evaluation Factors.
As prescribed in
815.304-71(a)
, insert the following clause:
SERVICE-DISABLED VETERAN-OWNED AND VETERAN-OWNED SMALL BUSINESS EVALUATION FACTORS (JAN 2023) (DEVIATION)
(a) In an effort to achieve socioeconomic small business goals, VA shall evaluate offerors based on their service-disabled Veteran-owned or Veteran-owned small business
certification
status and their proposed use of eligible
certified
service-disabled Veteran-owned small businesses (SDVOSBs) and
certified
Veteran-owned small businesses (VOSBs) as subcontractors.
(b) Eligible
and certified
service-disabled Veteran-owned small businesses offerors will receive full credit, and offerors qualifying as Veteran-owned small businesses will receive partial credit for the
certified
Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned and Veteran-Owned Small Business Status evaluation factor. To receive credit, an offeror must be
listed at the time of submission of offers and at time of award, as a certified SDVOSB/VOSB in the SBA certification database on the SBA Veteran Small Business Certification Program portal at
https://veterans.certify.sba.gov/
(see 13 CFR 128) and be otherwise eligible in accordance with SBA size standards for the acquisition and limitations on subcontracting requirements set forth in SBA regulations (see 13 CFR 121, 125 and 128)
.
(c) Non-Veteran offerors proposing to use
certified
SDVOSBs or VOSBs as subcontractors will receive some consideration under this evaluation factor. Offerors must state in their proposals the names of the
certified
SDVOSBs and VOSBs with whom they intend to subcontract and provide a brief description of the proposed subcontracts and the approximate dollar values of the proposed subcontracts. In addition, the proposed subcontractors must be
listed at the time of submission of offers and at time of award, as a certified SDVOSB/VOSB in the SBA certification database
.
(d) Pursuant to 38 U.S.C. 8127(g), any business concern that is determined by VA to have willfully and intentionally misrepresented a company’s SDVOSB/VOSB status is subject to debarment for a period of not less than five years. This includes the debarment of all principals in the business.
(End of clause)
852.215-71  Evaluation Factor Commitments.
As prescribed in
815.304–71(b)
, insert the following clause:
EVALUATION FACTOR COMMITMENTS (OCT 2019)
(a) The offeror agrees, if awarded a contract, to use the service-disabled Veteran-owned small businesses (SDVOSBs) or Veteran-owned small businesses (VOSBs) proposed as subcontractors in accordance with
852.215–70, Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned and Veteran-Owned Small Business Evaluation Factors
, or to substitute one or more SDVOSBs or VOSBs for subcontract work of the same or similar value.
(b) Pursuant to 38 USC 8127(g), any business concern that is determined by VA to have willfully and intentionally misrepresented a company’s SDVOSB/VOSB status is subject to debarment for a period of not less than five years. This includes the debarment of all principals in the business.
(End of clause)
852.215-72  Notice of Intent to Re-Solicit.
As prescribed at
815.370-5
, use the following provision:
NOTICE OF INTENT TO RE-SOLICIT (OCT 2019)
This solicitation provides offerors fewer than 30 days to submit proposals. In the event that only one offer is received in response to this solicitation, the Contracting Officer may cancel the solicitation and re-solicit for an additional period of at least 30 days in accordance with
815.370-2
.
(End of provision)
852.216-70  [Reserved]
852.216-71  Economic Price Adjustment of Contract Price(s) Based on a Price Index.
As prescribed in
816.203-4(e)(1)
, insert the following clause:
ECONOMIC PRICE ADJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT PRICE(S) BASED ON A PRICE INDEX (MAR 2018)
(a) To the extent that contract cost increases are provided for by this economic price adjustment clause, the Contractor warrants that the prices in this contract for the base period and any option periods do not include any amount to protect against such contingent cost increases.
(b) The Base and Adjusting Indexes, for the purpose of price adjustment under this clause, shall be _______________,
1
as contained in _______________,
2
as published by _______________,
3
.  All adjustments authorized under this clause shall be made by using the Base Index and Adjusting Indexes, which are published _______________,
4
.
(1) The Base Index, for the purposes of price adjustment under this clause, shall be the most recent Index published prior to the date for receipt of offers, or the due date for receipt of best and final offers if discussions were held whichever is later.  The Base Index shall remain constant for the entire term of the contract, including all option periods.
(2) The Adjusting Index shall be the most recent Index published prior to the date of contract adjustment, as specified in paragraph
(d)
.
(c) The percentage difference between the Base Index and the Adjusting Index, rounded to the nearest .01 percent (e.g., 4.57%), will be used in calculating all adjustments to the following line items:
5
The prices for these line items will be multiplied by the percentage increase or decrease and the resulting amount will be added to or deducted from the original line item price for that contract period (e.g., Base Year) to arrive at the new contract price for those line items from the effective date of the adjustment to the beginning of the next contract adjustment period, rounded to the same number of decimal points as the prices originally bid.  Calculations for option year contract terms will be based on the prices in the schedule for those option years.
(d) The dates of contract adjustment shall be_______________,
6
and the starting date of each option year, if not already included in these dates.  The Contracting Officer shall retain a copy of the Base Index in the contract file and, on each date of adjustment specified in this paragraph
(d)
, shall obtain a copy of the Adjusting Index.  The Contracting Officer shall calculate the adjustment due and shall, within 5 business days, issue a modification to the contract adjusting the unit or contract prices, as specified in paragraph
(c)
.  The adjusted unit or contract prices shall be effective for all orders placed or services provided after the date of contract adjustment as specified in this paragraph
(d)
until the beginning of the next contract adjustment period.  If the Contracting Officer fails to act, the Contractor shall request in writing a contract adjustment and any subsequent adjustment shall be retroactive to the applicable date of contract adjustment specified in this paragraph
(d)
.  The Contractor’s entitlement to price increases for a prior contract period (base year or option year) is waived unless the Contractor’s written request for an adjustment under this clause is received by the Contracting Officer no later than 30 days following the end of the base year for changes applicable to the base year, or 30 days following the end of each option year for changes applicable to that option year.  The Government’s right to contract decreases for prior contract periods (base year or option year) is waived unless the Contracting Officer processes a contract modification no later than 30 days following the end of the base year for changes applicable to the base year, or 30 days following the end of each option year for changes applicable to that option year.
(e) An example of an adjustment calculation is provided herein for informational purposes only.
(1) The original contract price or line item prices for that contract term (e.g., base year) shall be used for all calculations during that particular contract term and new calculations shall be made for each and every contract adjustment period specified in paragraph
(d)
during that contract term.
(2) For purposes of this example, the contract prices for the line items as specified in paragraph
(c)
will be adjusted by the percentage calculated as follows:
Adjusting Index for the current period
196.6
Minus the Base Index
-188.0
Equals the Index Point Change
8.6
Index Point Change Divided by the Base Index
.0457*
Result Multiplied by 100 Equals the Percentage Change (The Index Point Change Percentage)
4.57%
*This figure shall be rounded to the fourth decimal place.  When the fifth decimal is 1 to 4, the figure shall be rounded down, 5 to 9, rounded up.
(3) For a line item with an original bid price of $25.00 and a 4.57 percent Index Point Change increase as of the first contract adjustment period, as shown above, the calculations for a new contract price for the first contract adjustment period would be as follows:  $25.00 X .0457 = $1.14, $25 + $1.14 = $26.14**.  The new contract price for this line item from the beginning of that first contract adjustment period until the start of the next contract adjustment period would be $26.14 and the Contracting Officer would issue a contract modification reflecting this price change.
**The unit price adjustment shall be rounded up or down, as in paragraph
(e)(1)
above, to match the number of decimal places in the original bid.
(4) If the Adjusting Index went down for the second adjustment period, reflecting only a 3 percent Index Point Change increaseover the Base Index, the new price for this sample line item would be reduced for the second contract adjustment period from $26.14 to $25.75 as follows:  $25 X .03 = $0.75, $25 + $0.75= $25.75.  Note that the calculations for the second contract adjustment period are based on the original contract price for that contract term of $25.00.  The contract price for this line item is modified to reflect this new price for the second contract adjustment period.
(5) At the start of the first option year and each subsequent option year period (as well as for each contract adjustment period specified in paragraph
(d)
during that option year, if different), the Contracting Officer shall recalculate the contract or unit prices for that first option year based on any changes between the Adjusting Index and the Base Index, from the original contract award date to the start of the first option period, and based on the Contractor's new option year prices.  Assume the Contractor’s bid price for the first option year for the above sample line item was $25.50 and the calculations shown in paragraph
(e)(1)
above at the start of the first option period reflected a 6 percent Index Point Change.  The new contract price for this sample line item at the start of the first option period would be calculated as follows:  $25.50 X .06 = $1.53, $25.50 + $1.53 = $27.03.  The Contracting Officer would process a contract modification reflecting a revised contract price of $27.03 for the first contract adjustment period in the first option year.
(f) Price adjustments pursuant to this clause, shall be documented by a contract modification issued by the Contracting Officer, show the Base Index (see paragraph
(b)(1)
), the Adjusting Index, the adjusted contract prices (see paragraph
(c)
), the mathematical calculations used to arrive at the adjusted contract prices, and the effective date of the adjustment (see paragraph
(d)
).
(g) At the start of each option year, the Contracting Officer shall, within 5 days of the start of the option year period, process a contract modification adjusting the option year prices by the then current Index Point Change percentage, if any, reflecting the new adjusted prices for that first contract adjustment period in that option year.
(h) In the event that _______________,
7
discontinues, or alters substantially, its method of calculating the Index cited herein, the parties shall mutually agree upon an appropriate substitute for determining the price adjustment described herein.If the Contracting Officer determines that the Index consistently and substantially fails to reflect market conditions, the Contracting Officer may modify the contract to specify the use of an appropriate substitute index, effective on the date the Index specified herein begins to consistently and substantially fail to reflect market conditions.
(i) Any dispute arising under this clause shall be resolved subject to the “Disputes” clause of the contract.
(End of clause)
1
The Contracting Officer shall conduct market research to determine a suitable Consumer Price Index or other independent broad-based index to use for the solicitation.  The index used must be related to the type of commodity or service being acquired and must be expected to approximately track the economic changes expected to affect the Contractor’s costs.  For example, for medical services, an appropriate index may be the Consumer Price Index that tracks medical services.  For a contract for physician services, an appropriate index may be the Consumer Price Index that tracks professional medical services.  For example, in a solicitation for laboratory testing services, the Contracting Officer might enter into this block “the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) 1982-84 = 100, Medical Care, Medical Care Services.”
2
Specify where the Index can be found, such as in a solicitation for laboratory services, the Contracting Officer might enter “Table 1, CPI-U: U.S. City Average, by expenditure category and commodity and service group, found at
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/cpi.t01.htm
.”
3
Provide the information on who publishes the applicable Index used, e.g., in the example for laboratory services, “the U.S. Department of Labor.”
4
State how often the Index is published, such as “monthly, around the middle of the month.”  Note that some Consumer Price Indexes are not published monthly.  Ensure that the correct information is provided for the specific Index used.
5
Enter the line items that will be subject to adjustment or revise this paragraph to otherwise state what prices are subject to adjustment under this clause.
6
Establish time periods for when the contracting officer will process adjustments.  This could be “the first day of every quarter, January, April, July, and October” or “Annually on October 1
st
” or some other similar time periods.  Since the Contracting Officer is responsible for initiating the change, the Contracting Officer must establish a reminder mechanism to ensure that the adjustments are accomplished within the time period specified.
7
Enter in the name of the entity whose index is used in the clause.  In most cases when using this clause format, the index used would be a CPI-U Index and the Contracting Officer would enter “the U.S. Department of Labor.”
852.216-72  Proportional Economic Price Adjustment of Contract Price(S) Based on a Price Index.
As prescribed in
816.203-4(e)(2)
, insert the following clause:
PROPORTIONAL ECONOMIC PRICE ADJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT PRICE(S) BASED ON A PRICE INDEX (MAR 2018)
(a) To the extent that contract cost increases are provided for by this economic price adjustment clause, the Contractor warrants that the prices in this contract for any option periods do not include any amount to protect against such contingent cost increases.
(b) The cost index, for the purpose of price adjustment under this clause, shall be _______________
8
as contained in _______________
9
as published by _______________.
10
All adjustments authorized under this clause shall be made by using the Base Index and Adjusting Indexes, which are published _______________.
11
(1)
The Base Index
, for the purposes of price adjustment under this clause, shall be the most recent Index published prior to the closing date for receipt of offers, or the due date for receipt of best and final offers if discussions are held.  This Base Index shall remain constant throughout the life of the contract, including all options.
(2)
The Adjusting Index
shall be the most recent Index published prior to the date of contract adjustment, as specified in paragraph
(f)
.
(c) For purposes of this clause, it will be conclusively presumed that _______________
12
percent (%) of the price of _______________
13
represents the Base Cost of _______________
14
and the resulting Base Cost will be the basis upon which adjustment will be made under this clause.  This Base Cost will be used in calculating all adjustments to the following line items:  _______________.
15
A new Base Cost will be calculated for each option year period based on the new option year prices.
(d) The percentage of the price of the indexed commodity (see paragraph
(c)
) remains fixed throughout the life of the contract and is not subject to modification under this clause.  Any pricing actions pursuant to the “Changes” clause or other clause or provision of the contract, except for this clause, will be priced as though there were no provisions for economic price adjustment.
(e) All price adjustments shall be applicable only to the specific contract adjustment period to which the calculations are made.  For every contract adjustment period, new calculations shall be made and new prices determined.  Every adjustment during the Base Year shall be based on the original contract prices for that contract year and every adjustment during an option year shall be based on the original contract prices for that option year.  The Contracting Officer must make new calculations for each and every contract adjustment period specified in paragraph
(f)
and at the beginning of each new option year, if different.
(f) The dates of contract adjustment shall be _______________
16
and the starting date of each option year, if not already included in these dates.  The Contracting Officer shall retain a copy of the Base Index in the contract file and, on each date of adjustment specified herein, obtain a copy of the Adjusting Index.  The Contracting Officer shall calculate the adjustment due and shall, within 5 business days, issue a modification to the contract adjusting the contract or unit price(s).  The adjusted contract or unit price(s) shall be effective for all orders placed or services provided after the date of contract adjustment, as specified in this paragraph (f), until the date of the next contract adjustment.  If the Contracting Officer fails to act, the Contractor shall request a contract adjustment in writing and any subsequent adjustment shall be retroactive to the applicable date of contract adjustment.  The Contractor’s entitlement to price increases for a prior contract period (base year or option year) shall be waived unless the Contractor’s written request for an adjustment under this clause is received by the Contracting Officer no later than 30 days following the end of the base year for changes applicable to the base year, or 30 days following the end of each option year for changes applicable to that option year.  The Government’s right to contract decreases for prior contract periods (base year or option year) shall be waived unless the Contracting Officer processes a contract modification no later than 30 days following the end of the base year for changes applicable to the base year, or 30 days following the end of each option year for changes applicable to that option year.
(g) An example of an adjustment calculation is provided herein for informational purposes only.
(1) For purposes of this example, assume that a contract is for ambulance services, that the contract price is $2.10 per mile one way, that price adjustments will be made on the basis of the cost of gasoline, that the cost of gasoline represents 10% of the total cost per mile (the Base Cost is 10% of $2.10 (the per mile one way price in Line Item X), or $0.21), and that contract adjustments will be made quarterly.  If the Base Index (the price of gasoline the week prior to receipt of bids) is $1.559 per gallon and the price of gasoline at the first date of contract adjustment is $2.129 per gallon, the calculations for contract price adjustment would be as follows:
Adjusting Index (most recent Index cost of gasoline as of the date of the first adjustment period)
$2.129 per gallon
Minus the Base Index (Index cost of gasoline as of the date of receipt of offers)
-$1.559 per gallon
Equals increase (or decrease) to the Base Index
$0.570
Divide increase (or decrease) to the Base Index by the Base Index
$0.570 + $1.559 = .3656*
(36.56% increase)
Base Cost of $0.21 (10% of $2.10) multiplied by .3656 = $0.0768 unit price increase
New Unit price following the adjustment is $2.10 plus $0.0768 = $2.1768 per mile (rounded to $2.18)**
*This figure shall be rounded to the fourth decimal place.  When the fifth decimal is 1 to 4, the figure shall be rounded down, 5 to 9, rounded up.
**The unit price adjustment shall be rounded up or down, as above, to match the number of decimal places in the original bid.
(2) For the second contract adjustment period, all calculations would be based on the original contract bid price for that contract year, $2.10 per mile in this example.  If the price of gasoline goes down during the second adjustment period to the original Base Index price of $1.559 per gallon, the adjusted contract price for that second period would return to $2.10 per mile (there would be a zero percent increase or decrease to the Base Cost and thus no change to the original bid price for that contract adjustment period).  The Contracting Officer would then issue a contract modification returning the contract price from $2.18 to $2.10 per mile for that contract adjustment period.  If, on the other hand, the price of gasoline actually went below the Base Index price, say to $1.449 per gallon, the calculations for the second economic price adjustment period would be as follows:
Adjusting Index (most recent Index cost of gasoline as of the date of the second adjustment period)
$1.449 per gallon
Minus the Base Index (Index cost of gasoline as of the date of receipt of offers)
-$1.559 per gallon
Equals increase (or decrease) to Base Index
($0.110) (a negative $.11)
Divide increase (or decrease} to the Base Index by the Base Index
($0.11) + $1.559 = (.0706)
(7.06% decrease)
Base Cost of $0.21 (10% of $2.10) multiplied by (.0706) = ($0.0148) unit price decrease
New Unit price following the second economic price adjustment is $2.10 minus $0.0148 = $2.0852 per mile (rounded to $2.09)
(3) At the start of the first option year, the Contracting Officer shall recalculate the price per mile based on any changes in the price of gasoline from the original contract award date and based on the Contractor’s new first option year price per mile.  Assuming the Contractor’s bid price per mile for the first option year was $2.25 per mile, the new Base Cost for gasoline would be 10% of $2.25, or $0.225 (note that the original percent figure from paragraph
(c)
(10% in this sample) stays constant throughout the life of the contract), but the Base Cost would change if the option year contract price changes.  If the Adjusting Index for gasoline at the start of the first option year was now up to $1.899 per gallon, the new first option year price for the first contract adjustment period would be calculated as follows:
Adjusting Index (most recent Index cost of gasoline as of the first day of the first option period)
$1.899 per gallon
Minus the Base Index (Index cost of gasoline as of the date of receipt of offers)
-$1.559 per gallon
Equals increase (or decrease) to the Base Index
$0.340
Divide the increase (or decrease) to the Base Index by the Base Index
$0.34 + $1.559 = .2181
(21.81% increase)
Base Cost of $0.225 (10%* of $2.25) multiplied by .2181 = $0.0491 unit price increase.
New Unit price for the first contract adjustment period in the first option year is $2.25 plus $0.0491 = $2.2991 per mile (rounded to $2.30 per mile).
*Note that the percentage remains constant (10%) but that the Base Cost has been increased for the first contract adjustment period in the first option year, since the Base Cost is a percentage of the first option year unit cost per mile (in this sample), and the unit cost per mile has increased in this sample for the first option year from $2.10 to $2.25.
Although the new unit price for the first contract adjustment period of the first option year following application of the economic price adjustment in this sample would be $2.30 per mile, all economic price adjustment calculations made during that first option year would be based on the original first option year bid price ($2.25 in this sample).  If in the second contract adjustment period of the first option year, the calculations resulted in a unit price increase for gasoline of $0.0332, the adjusted price for that period would be $2.25 + $0.0332 = $2.2832, rounded to $2.28 per mile.
(h) Price adjustments pursuant to this clause, which shall be made by contract modification issued by the Contracting Officer, shall show the Base Index (see paragraph
(b)(1)
), the Adjusting Index, the Base Cost (see paragraph
(c)
), the mathematical calculations used to arrive at the adjusted contract unit price, and the effective date of the adjustment.
(i) In the event that _______________
17
discontinues, or alters substantially, its method of calculating the Index cited herein, the parties shall mutually agree upon an appropriate substitute for determining the price adjustment described herein. If the Contracting Officer determines that the Index consistently and substantially fails to reflect market conditions, the Contracting Officer may modify the contract to specify use of an appropriate substitute index, effective on the date the Index specified herein begins to consistently and substantially fail to reflect market conditions.
(j) Any dispute arising under this clause shall subject to the “Disputes” clause of the contract.
(End of clause)
8
The Contracting Officer shall conduct market research to determine a suitable cost index for use in the solicitation.  The index used is directly related to the type of commodity or service most likely to impact the Contractor and must approximately track the economic changes affecting the Contractor’s costs.  For transportation services, an appropriate index might be one that tracks the price of gasoline or diesel fuel.  For example, in a solicitation for ambulance services, the Contracting Officer might enter into this block the “Weekly U.S. Retail Gasoline Prices, Regular Grade Index for New England” (or California or whichever index is the most appropriate).
9
Specify where the index can be found, such as in an example for gasoline, “the Energy Information Administration Web site (see
VAAM M816.203-70
).
10
Provide the information on who publishes the index, such as, in an example for gasoline, “the U.S. Department of Energy.”
11
State how often the index used is published, such as, in an example for an index for gasoline, “weekly each Monday at 5:00PM (Eastern time),” or “Tuesday if Monday is a holiday.”
12
Prior to issuing the solicitation, the Contracting Officer must conduct market research to determine an appropriate percentage to include in this paragraph.  The percentage should reflect that portion of the unit price for the services or supplies being acquired that is applicable to the indexed commodity.  For instance, in the case of an ambulance contract, research might indicate that, at the time the solicitation is being drafted and based on prior per-mile bid prices, the cost of gasoline accounts for 10% of the per mile cost of operating an ambulance. For example, if the prior bid price had been $1.60 per mile, ambulances average 10 miles per gallon, and the cost of gasoline had been $1.559 per gallon, 1 mile’s worth of gasoline ($.16) would be approximately ten (10) percent of the prior per mile bid price of $1.60 per mile.  This percent must be stated in the solicitation so that the same figure applies to all bidders.  This figure remains constant throughout the life of the contract.
13
Enter in this block the portion of the contract that will be subject to price adjustment, e.g., “each one-way mile of ambulance services,” or the line items that will be subject to price adjustment.
14
Enter in this block the commodity applicable to the index being used, as in an example for an ambulance contract, “regular grade gasoline.”
15
Enter the line items that will be subject to adjustment, as in an example for an ambulance contract, the line items that reflect the one-way cost per mile for ambulance services for the base year and for each option year.
16
Establish time periods for when the Contracting Officer will process adjustments.  This could be “the first day of each month” or “the first day of every quarter, January, April, July, and October,” or “annually on October 1
st
” or some other similar time periods.  Since the Contracting Officer is responsible for initiating the change, the Contracting Officer must establish a reminder mechanism to ensure that the adjustments are accomplished on time.
17
Enter in the name of the entity whose index is used in the clause.  In the example for ambulance services using the “Weekly U.S. Retail Gasoline Prices, Regular Grade” index; the Contracting Officer would enter the “Energy Information Administration, Department of Energy.”
852.216-73  Economic Price Adjustment - State Nursing Home Care for Veterans.
As prescribed in
816.203-4(e)(3)
, insert the following clause:
ECONOMIC PRICE ADJUSTMENT - STATE NURSING HOME CARE FOR VETERANS (MAR 2018)
(a)
Rate Determination
.  The per diem rate is established by the current Medicaid rate for Medicaid approved nursing home care plus a fair market amount (percentage) to cover the costs of supplies, services, and equipment above that provided under Medicaid established by the local State Medicaid Agency (SMA).  Rates established after the effective date of this contract will constitute a modification to the contract.
(1) The Medicaid rate covers room, board, and routine nursing care services.
(2) For all levels of nursing care a percentage is added for routine ancillary services/ supplies, such as drugs, nursing supplies, oxygen (occasional use), x-ray, laboratory, physician visits, and rental equipment.
(3) Special equipment, e.g. Clinitron bed, is not considered routine ancillary services. (and may not be provided by the VA).
(4) Drug costs which comprise more than eight and one-half percent (8.5%) of the per diem rate are generally not considered routine ancillary supplies (and may not be provided by the VA).
(5) Rehabilitation therapies will be provided as distinct levels of care, i.e., skilled, intermediate, and custodial care.  Hospice Care and Dialysis are not included in the rate.  Payment for Hospices and Dialysis services is provided by the VA or other payers as determined by the veteran with the VA’s Approval.
(b)
Economic Price Adjustment
.  This clause does not apply to ancillary services that may be added or deleted from the agreement.
(1) The per diem rate(s) will apply throughout the term of this contract, including extension period(s).  The rate(s) may be adjusted only to reflect a change in a Medicaid rate as authorized by the SMA.  Normally, this will be on an annual basis.  The negotiated percentage above the Medicaid rate, to cover the all-inclusive nature of the contract, will not be renegotiated; but will be applied and added to the new Medicaid rate for the adjusted per diem rate for each level of care item.  In this regard, new rates will be negotiated requiring a modification to the contact.  Each per diem price adjustment under this clause is subject to the following limitations:
(2) Any adjustment shall be limited to the effect of increases or decreases in the approved SMA’s patient care components within the affected Medicaid groups.
(3) Adjustments will occur no more frequently than those issued by the SMA.
(4) No adjustments are made until the Contracting Officer receives from the SMA an authenticated copy of the new rates signed and dated at the top right of the document by the authorized nursing home official.  Within ten days after this occurs, the Contracting Officers will execute an approval signature and date at the approximate locations of the nursing home official’s signature, the action of which will serve as the effective date of the adjusted rate.  A copy of the fully executed document will be sent to the nursing home official for record keeping purposes.
(End of clause)
852.216-74  Economic Price Adjustment - Medicaid Labor Rates.
As prescribed in
816.203-4(e)(4)
, insert the following clause:
ECONOMIC PRICE ADJUSTMENT - MEDICAID LABOR RATES (MAR 2018)
This clause does not apply to rates for non-Medicaid nursing homes.
(a) The Contractor shall notify the Contracting Officer if, at any time during contract performance, the Medicaid rate set by the State Medical Agency (SMA) forcontract line item increases or decreases in the Schedule.  The Contractor shall furnish this notice within 60 days after the increase or decrease, or within any additional period that the Contracting Officer may approve in writing, but not later than the date of final payment under this contract.  The notice shall include the Contractor’s proposal for an adjustment in the contract unit prices to be negotiated under paragraph
(b)
of this clause, and shall include, in the form required by the Contracting Officer, supporting data explaining the cause, effective date, and the amount of the increase or decrease and the amount of the Contractor’s adjustment proposal.
(b) The Contracting Officer and the Contractor shall negotiate a price adjustment to the contract’s unit prices and its effective date upon receipt of the notice and data under paragraph
(a)
of this clause.  However, the Contracting Officer may postpone the negotiations until an accumulation of increases and decreases of the Medicaid labor rates (including fringe benefits) shown in the Schedule results in an adjustment allowable under subparagraph
(c)(3)
of this clause.  The Contracting Officer shall modify this contract as follows:
(1) Include the price adjustment and its effective date;
(2) Revise the Medicaid labor rates (including fringe benefits) as shown in the Schedule to reflect the increases or decreases resulting from the SMA adjustment.  The Contractor shall continue performance pending agreement on, or determination of, any adjustment and its effective date.
(c) Any price adjustment under this clause is subject to the following limitations:
(1) Adjustment shall be limited to the effect on unit prices of the increases or decreases of the Medicaid rates of pay for labor (including fringe benefits) shown in the Schedule.  There shall be no adjustment for changes in rates or unit prices other than those shown in the Schedule.
(2) No upward adjustment shall apply to supplies or services that are required to be delivered or performed before the effective date of the adjustment, unless the Contractor’s failure to deliver or perform according to the delivery schedule results from causes beyond the Contractor’s control and without its fault or negligence, within the meaning of the Default clause.
(3) There shall be no adjustment for any change in rates of pay for labor (including fringe benefits) or unit prices for material which would not result in a net change of at least threepercent of the then-current total contract price.  This limitation shall not apply, however, if, after final delivery of all contract line items, either party requests an adjustment under paragraph
(b)
of this clause.
(4) The aggregate of the increases in any contract unit price made under this clause shall not exceed 10 percent of the original unit price.  There is no percentage limitation on the amount of decreases made under this clause.
(d) The Contracting Officer, precluding certified cost and pricing data may examine the Contractor’s books, records, and other supporting data relevant to the cost of labor (including fringe benefits) and material during all reasonable times until the end of 3 years after the date of final payment under this contract or the time periods specified in
Subpart 4.7
of the
Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR)
, whichever is earlier.
(End of clause)
852.216-75  Economic Price Adjustment - Fuel Surcharge.
As prescribed in
816.203-4(e)(5)
, insert the following clause:
ECONOMIC PRICE ADJUSTMENT - FUEL SURCHARGE (NOV 2021)
(a) To the extent that contract fuel cost increases are provided for by this economic price adjustment clause, the Contractor warrants that the prices in this contract for any option periods do not include any amount to protect against such contingent fuel cost increases.
(b) The fuel cost index, for the purpose of price adjustment under this clause, shall be the “Weekly Retail On-Highway Diesel Prices Index.”  The Base Fuel Cost, for the purpose of price adjustments under this clause, shall be the most recent Index Weekly Average Diesel Fuel Price per gallon published prior to the closing date for receipt of offers, or the due date for receipt of final proposal revisions if discussions are held.
(c) For purposes of this clause, it will be conclusively presumed that x% increase or decrease of the Base Fuel Cost represents a reasonable fluctuation of diesel fuel prices.  The Base Fuel Cost + x% price range will be determined for the base contract year and will remain constant throughout the life of the contract, including option years.  Base Fuel Cost price range is documented at time of contract award.
(d) Increases (or decreases) in the diesel fuel costs (Base Fuel Cost x%) as listed on the Index two weeks prior to the end of each calendar quarter can trigger a request from the Contractor to the Government (or from the Government to the Contractor) for cost adjustments.  Notice must be in writing to the Subsistence Prime Vendor (SPV) Contracting Officer (or Contracting Officer’s Representative) no less than ten days prior to the beginning of the next quarter.
(e) Since fuel cost is only a part of the SPV Contracted distribution cost, the adjustment will be made as a penny per delivered case for every ten cent fuel price per gallon increase or decrease to the Base Fuel Cost x%.  The difference is rounded down to the nearest whole cent and will be added to last line of each invoice noted as “Fuel Adjustment.”
Example calculation of fuel price change:
Price $2.50 Base (+ or -) 15% Average National Diesel Fuel $2.88 - $2.13
3
rd
QTR (3
rd
week June) first year Fuel Price $3.05 Calculation:
$3.05 - 2.88 = $ .17 (rounded down to 10 cents) Add one cent per delivered case to each invoice, starting first Monday of July.
3rd QTR Diesel Fuel Price decrease $1.80 Calculation:
$2.13 - 1.80 = $ .33 (rounded down to $.30 cents) Credit each invoice $.03 cents per delivered case.
(f) Once approved, the date for contract fuel price adjustment will be the first Monday of the first month of each quarter unless otherwise designated at time of contract award.
(g) The Contracting Officer shall retain a copy of the Base Fuel Index establishing the Base Fuel Cost and the calculation of the price range incorporating the x% adjustment in the contract file.  All subsequent changes will be documented within the contract file and communicated to the Contractor and VA SPV customers via email one week prior to the fuel price adjustment implementation.
(h) Any adjustments for fuel price changes will only be implemented if requested in writing, reviewed by both parties, and provided within the designated time frames.  No retroactive cost adjustments will be made.  A contract modification will be issued at inception of first increase or decrease detailing Base Fuel Cost, price range, and calculation of first fuel adjustment charge. Adjustment will remain in effect with quarterly calculation changes as needed until price falls within Base Fuel Cost price range.  A contract modification will be issued to terminate the adjustment when price returns to Base Fuel Cost + x% price range.
(i) In the event that “the Energy Information Administration, Department of Energy” discontinues, or substantially alters its method of calculating the national average diesel fuel prices cited herein, the parties shall mutually agree upon an appropriate substitute for determining the price adjustment described herein.  If the Contracting Officer determines the Index consistently and substantially fails to reflect market conditions, the Contracting Officer may modify the contract to specify use of an appropriate substitute Index, effective on the date the Index specified herein begins to consistently and substantially fail to reflect market conditions.
(j) Any dispute arising under this clause shall be determined in accordance with and subject to the “Disputes” clause of the contract.
(End of clause)
852.216-76  Requirements–Supplement for Mortuary Services.
As prescribed in
816.506-70
, use the following clause
REQUIREMENTS–SUPPLEMENT FOR MORTUARY SERVICES (OCT 2019)
(a) Except as provided in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this clause, the Government will order from the Contractor all of its requirements in the area of performance for the supplies and services listed in the schedule of this contract.
(b) Each order will be issued as a delivery order and will list—
(1) The supplies or services being ordered;
(2) The quantities to be furnished;
(3) Delivery or performance dates;
(4) Place of delivery or performance;
(5) Packing and shipping instructions;
(6) The address to send invoices; and
(7) The funds from which payment will be made.
(c) The Government may elect not to order supplies and services under this contract in instances where the body is removed from the area for medical, scientific, or other reason.
(d) In an epidemic or other emergency, the contracting activity may obtain services beyond the capacity of the Contractor’s facilities from other sources.
(e) Contracting Officers of the following activities may order services and supplies under this contract:
______________________________
______________________________
(End of clause)
852.217-70  Contract Action Definitization.
As prescribed in
817.7005(a)
, insert the following clause:
CONTRACT ACTION DEFINITIZATION (JUL 2019)
(a) A [
Insert specific type of contract action
] is contemplated. The Contractor agrees to begin promptly negotiating with the Contracting Officer the terms of a definitive contract action that will include all clauses required by the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) on the date of execution of the undefinitized contract action, all clauses required by law on the date of execution of the definitive contract action, and any other mutually agreeable clauses, terms, and conditions. The Contractor agrees to submit a ______________ [
Insert type of proposal, e.g., fixed-price, or cost-and-fee
] proposal with cost or pricing data, as appropriate, supporting it.
(b) The schedule for definitizing this contract action is as follows [
Insert target date for definitization of the contract action and dates for submission of proposal, beginning of negotiations, and, if appropriate, submission of the make-or-buy plans, subcontracting plans, and cost or pricing data
].
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
(c) If agreement on a definitive contract action to supersede this undefinitized contract action is not reached by the target date in paragraph (b) of this clause, or within any extension of it granted by the Contracting Officer, the Contracting Officer may, with the approval of a Contracting Officer one level above, determine a reasonable price or fee in accordance with
FAR subpart 15.4
and
FAR part 31
, subject to Contractor appeal as provided in the Disputes clause. In any event, the Contractor shall proceed with completion of the contract, subject only to
FAR 52.216-24
, Limitation of Government Liability.
(1) After the Contracting Officer’s determination of price or fee, the contract shall be governed by—
(i) All clauses required by the FAR on the date of execution of this undefinitized contract action for either fixed-price or cost-reimbursement contracts, as determined by the Contracting Officer under this paragraph (c);
(ii) All clauses required by law as of the date of the Contracting Officer’s determination; and
(iii) Any other clauses, terms, and conditions mutually agreed upon.
(2) To the extent consistent with paragraph (c)(1) of this clause, all clauses, terms, and conditions included in this undefinitized contract action shall continue in effect, except those that by their nature apply only to an undefinitized contract action.
(d) The definitive contract action resulting from this undefinitized contract action will include a negotiated __________ [
Insert “cost/price ceiling” or “firm-fixed-price”
] in no event to exceed __________ [
Insert the not-to-exceed amount
].
(End of clause)
Deviation per
Class Deviation
from VAAR parts 802, 806, 808, 810, 813, 819, 852, and 873, dated February 16, 2023, to implement the expansion of the certification requirement across all Federal agencies for Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses (SDVOSBs), and the transfer of the certification authority for both SDVOSBs and Veteran-Owned Small Businesses (VOSBs) from the VA to the Small Business Administration (SBA), effective January 1, 2023. The class deviation updates various VAAR parts to implement the new policy regarding the SBA Veteran Small Business Certification Program, the relevant SBA certification database, and removing the VA VIP database title and web address, and other pertinent information.
852.219-70  VA Small Business Subcontracting Plan Minimum Requirements.
As prescribed in
819.708
, insert the following clause:
VA SMALL BUSINESS SUBCONTRACTING PLAN MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS (JAN 2023) (DEVIATION)
(a) This clause does not apply to small business concerns.
(b) If the offeror is required to submit an individual subcontracting plan, the minimum goals for award of subcontracts to
certified
service-disabled veteran-owned small business and
certified
veteran-owned small business SDVOSB/VOSB shall be at least commensurate with the Department's annual SDVOSB/VOSB subcontracting goals.
(c) For a commercial plan, the minimum goals for award of subcontracts to SDVOSB/VOSB shall be at least commensurate with the Department's annual service-disabled veteran-owned small business and veteran-owned small business subcontracting goals for the total value of projected subcontracts to support the sales for the commercial plan.
(d) To be credited toward goal achievements, SDVOSB/VOSBs must be
certified and listed in the SBA certification database at
https://veterans.certify.sba.gov/
(see 13 CFR 128) and be otherwise eligible in accordance with SBA size standards for the acquisition and limitations on subcontracting requirements set forth in SBA regulations (see 13 CFR 121, 125 and 128)
. A contractor may reasonably rely on a subcontractor’s status as shown in the
SBA certification
database as of the date of subcontract award, provided the contractor retains records of the results of the
SBA certification
database query.
(e) The Contractor shall annually submit a listing of SDVOSB/VOSB (for which credit toward goal achievement is to be applied) for review by personnel in the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization. Use VA Form 0896A, Report of Subcontracts to Small and Veteran-Owned Business.
(f) Pursuant to 38 U.S.C. 8127(g), any business concern that is determined by VA to have willfully and intentionally misrepresented a company’s SDVOSB/VOSB status is subject to debarment for a period of not less than five years. This includes the debarment of all principals in the business.
(End of clause)
852.219-71  Notification of Competition Limited to Eligible 8(a) Participants.
As prescribed in
819.811-370
, when
FAR 52.219-18
, Notification of Competition Limited to Eligible 8(a) Participants, is utilized, use this clause in conjunction with the FAR clause.
NOTIFICATION OF COMPETITION LIMITED TO ELIGIBLE 8(a) PARTICIPANTS (NOV 2022)
Substitute paragraph (c) in
FAR Clause 52.219-18
as follows:
(c) Any award resulting from this solicitation will be made directly by the Contracting Officer to the successful 8(a) offeror. Although SBA is not identified as such in the award form, SBA is still the Prime Contractor. Contractor shall comply with the limitations on subcontracting as provided in 13 CFR 125.6 and other 8(a) program requirements, as set forth in 13 CFR part 124.
(End of clause)
852.219-72  Notification of Section 8(a) Direct Award.
As prescribed in
819.811-370
, paragraph (a), insert the following clause:
NOTIFICATION OF SECTION 8(a) DIRECT AWARD (NOV 2022)
(a) Offers are solicited only from small business concerns expressly certified by the Small Business Administration (SBA) for participation in the SBA’s 8(a) Program. By submission of its offer, the Offeror represents that it is in good standing and that it meets all of the criteria for participation in the program in accordance with 13 CFR part 124.
(b) Any award resulting from this solicitation will be made directly by the Contracting Officer to the successful 8(a) offeror. Although SBA is not identified as such in the award form, SBA is still the Prime Contractor.
(c) This contract is issued as a direct award between the contracting activity and the 8(a) Contractor pursuant to the Partnership Agreement (PA) between the Small Business Administration (SBA) and the Department of Veterans Affairs.
(d) SBA retains responsibility for 8(a) certification, 8(a) eligibility determinations and related issues, and providing counseling and assistance to the 8(a) Contractor under the 8(a) program. The cognizant SBA district office is:
_________________________________________________________________
[To be completed by the Contracting Officer at the time of award]
(e) The contracting activity is responsible for administering the contract and taking any action on behalf of the Government under the terms and conditions of the contract. However, the contracting activity shall give advance notice to the SBA before it issues a final notice terminating performance, either in whole or in part, under the contract.The contracting activity shall obtain SBA’s approval prior to processing any novation agreement(s).The contracting activity may assign contract administration functions to a contract administration office.
(f) The Contractor agrees:
(1) To notify the Contracting Officer, simultaneous with its notification to SBA (as required by SBA's 8(a) regulations), when the owner or owners upon whom 8(a) eligibility is based plan to relinquish ownership or control of the concern.
(2) Consistent with 15 U.S.C. 637(a)(21), transfer of ownership or control shall result in termination of the contract for convenience, unless SBA waives the requirement for termination prior to the actual relinquishing of ownership and control.
(3) It will adhere to the requirements of
52.219-14
, Limitations of Subcontracting and other requirements in 13 CFR part 124 and 13 CFR 125.6, as applicable.
(g) Any proposed joint venture involving an 8(a) Participant must be approved by SBA before contracts are awarded.
(End of clause)
Deviation per
Class Deviation
from VAAR parts 802, 806, 808, 810, 813, 819, 852, and 873, dated February 16, 2023, to implement the expansion of the certification requirement across all Federal agencies for Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses (SDVOSBs), and the transfer of the certification authority for both SDVOSBs and Veteran-Owned Small Businesses (VOSBs) from the VA to the Small Business Administration (SBA), effective January 1, 2023. The class deviation updates various VAAR parts to implement the new policy regarding the SBA Veteran Small Business Certification Program, the relevant SBA certification database, and removing the VA VIP database title and web address, and other pertinent information.
852.219-73  VA Notice of Total Set-Aside for
Certified
Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses.
As prescribed in
819.7011
, insert the following clause:
VA NOTICE OF TOTAL SET-ASIDE FOR CERTIFIED SERVICE-DISABLED VETERAN-OWNED SMALL BUSINESSES (JAN 2023) (DEVIATION)
(a)
Definition
.For the Department of Veterans Affairs, “
Service-disabled Veteran-owned small business concern or SDVOSB
”:
(1)Means a small business concern—
(i) Not less than 51 percent of which is owned by one or more service-disabled Veterans or, in the case of any publicly owned business, not less than 51 percent of the stock of which is owned by one or more service-disabled Veterans or eligible surviving spouses (see
VAAR 802.101
, Surviving Spouse definition);
(ii) The management and daily business operations of which are controlled by one or more service-disabled Veterans (or eligible surviving spouses) or, in the case of a service-disabled Veteran with permanent and severe disability, the spouse or permanent caregiver of such Veteran;
(iii) The business meets Federal small business size standards for the applicable North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code identified in the solicitation document;
(iv) The business has been
certified
for ownership and control pursuant to
38 U.S.C. 8127, 13 CFR 128,
and is listed
as certified
in
the SBA certification database at
https://veterans.certify.sba.gov/
; and
(v) The business
agrees to
comply with
VAAR subpart 819.70
and Small Business Administration (SBA) regulations regarding small business size
, government contracting, and the Veteran Small Business Certification Program at 13 CFR parts 121, 125, and 128
.
(2) The term “Service-disabled Veteran” means a Veteran, as defined in 38 U.S.C. 101(2), with a disability that is service-connected, as defined in 38 U.S.C. 101(16).
(3) The term “small business concern” has the meaning given that term under section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632).
(4) The term “small business concern owned and controlled by Veterans with service-connected disabilities” has the meaning given the term “small business concern owned and controlled by service-disabled veterans” under section 3(q)(2) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632(q)(2)).
(5) The term "SDVOSB participant” or certified SDVOSB means a small business that has been certified in the SBA Veteran Small Business Certification Program and listed in the SBA certification database (see 13 CFR 128.102).
(b)
General.
In order for a concern to submit an offer and be eligible for the award of an SDVOSB set-aside or sole source contract, the concern must qualify as a small business concern under the size standard corresponding to the NAICS code assigned to the contract and be listed as an SDVOSB participant in the SBA certification database as set forth in 13 CFR 128.
(1) Offers received from entities that are not
certified
SDVOSBs
and listed in the SBA certification database
at the time of offer shall not be considered.
(2) Any award resulting from this solicitation shall be made to a
certified
SDVOSB
listed in the SBA certification database
who is eligible at the time of submission of offer(s) and at the time of award.
(3) The requirements in this clause apply to any contract, order or subcontract where the firm receives a benefit or preference from its designation as an SDVOSB, including set-asides, sole source awards, and evaluation preferences.
(c)
Representation.
Pursuant to 38 U.S.C. 8127(e), only
certified
SDVOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
are considered eligible to receive award of a resulting contract. By submitting an offer, the prospective contractor represents that it is an eligible
and certified
SDVOSB as defined in this clause,
13 CFR 121, 125, and 128
, and
VAAR subpart 819.70
.
(d)
Agreement
/LOS certification
.
When awarded a contract action, including orders under multiple-award contracts, an SDVOSB agrees that in the performance of the contract, the SDVOSB shall comply with requirements in
VAAR subpart 819.70
and SBA regulations on
small business size,
and government contracting programs at 13 CFR part 121 and part 125, including the non-manufacturer rule and limitations on subcontracting
(LOS)
requirements in 13 CFR 121.406(b) and 13 CFR 125.6. For the purpose of limitations on subcontracting, only
certified
SDVOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
(including independent contractors) shall be considered eligible and/or “similarly situated” (i.e., a firm that has the same small business program status as the prime contractor). An otherwise eligible firm further agrees to comply with the required
(LOS)
certification requirements in this solicitation (see
852.219-75
or
852.219-76
as applicable). These requirements are summarized as follows:
(1)
Services.
In the case of a contract for services (except construction), the SDVOSB prime contractor will not pay more than 50% of the amount paid by the government to the prime for contract performance to firms that are not
certified
SDVOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
(excluding direct costs to the extent they are not the principal purpose of the acquisition and the SDVOSB/VOSB does not provide the service, such as airline travel, cloud computing services, or mass media purchases). When a contract includes both services and supplies, the 50 percent limitation shall apply only to the service portion of the contract.
(2)
Supplies/products.
(i) In the case of a contract for supplies or products (other than from a non-manufacturer of such supplies), the SDVOSB prime contractor will not pay more than 50% of the amount paid by the government to the prime for contract performance, excluding the cost of materials, to firms that are not
certified
SDVOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
. When a contract includes both supply and services, the 50 percent limitation shall apply only to the supply portion of the contract.
(ii) In the case of a contract for supplies from a non-manufacturer, the SDVOSB prime contractor will supply the product of a domestic small business manufacturer or processor, unless a waiver as described in 13 CFR 121.406(b)(5) has been granted.Refer to 13
CFR
125.6(a)(2)(ii) for guidance pertaining to multiple item procurements.
(3)
General construction.
In the case of a contract for general construction, the SDVOSB prime contractor will not pay more than 85% of the amount paid by the government to the prime for contract performance, excluding the cost of materials, to firms that are not
certified
SDVOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
.
(4)
Special trade construction contractors.
In the case of a contract for special trade contractors, no more than 75% of the amount paid by the government to the prime for contract performance, excluding the cost of materials, may be paid to firms that are not
certified
SDVOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
.
(5)
Subcontracting.
An SDVOSB
subcontractor
must meet the NAICS size standard assigned by the prime contractor and be
certified and
listed in
the SBA certification database
to count as similarly situated. Any work that a first tier VIP-listed SDVOSB subcontractor further subcontracts will count towards the percent of subcontract amount that cannot be exceeded. For supply or construction contracts, the cost of materials is excluded and not considered to be subcontracted. When a contract includes both services and supplies, the 50 percent limitation shall apply only to the portion of the contract with the preponderance of the expenditure upon which the assigned NAICS is based. For information and more specific requirements, refer to 13 CFR 125.6.
(e)
Required limitations on subcontracting compliance measurement period.
An SDVOSB shall comply with the limitations on subcontracting as follows:
[Contracting Officer check as appropriate.]
____ By the end of the base term of the contract or order, and then by the end of each subsequent option period; or
____ By the end of the performance period for each order issued under the contract.
(f)
Joint ventures.
A joint venture may be considered eligible as an SDVOSB if the joint venture complies with the requirements in
13 CFR 128.402 and the managing joint venture partner makes the representations under paragraph (c) of this clause
. A joint venture agrees that, in the performance of the contract, the applicable percentage specified in paragraph (d) of this clause will be performed by the aggregate of the joint venture participants.
(g)
Precedence.
The VA Veterans First Contracting Program, as defined in
VAAR 802.101
,
subpart 819.70
, and this clause, takes precedence over any inconsistencies between the requirements of the SBA
Veteran Small Business Certification
Program, and the VA Veterans First Contracting Program.
(h)
Misrepresentation.
Pursuant to 38 USC 8127(g), any business concern, including all its principals, that is determined by VA to have willfully and intentionally misrepresented a company’s SDVOSB status is subject to debarment from contracting with the Department for a period of not less than five years (see
VAAR 809.406-2
Causes for Debarment).
(End of clause)
852.219-74  VA Notice of Total Set-Aside for
Certified
Veteran-Owned Small Businesses.
As prescribed in
819.7011
, insert the following clause:
VA NOTICE OF TOTAL SET-ASIDE FOR CERTIFIED VETERAN-OWNED SMALL BUSINESSES (JAN 2023) (DEVIATION)
(a)
Definition.
For the Department of Veterans Affairs, “Veteran-owned small business or VOSB”:
(1) Means a small business concern—
(i) Not less than 51 percent of which is owned by one or more Veterans or, in the case of any publicly owned business, not less than 51 percent of the stock of which is owned by one or more Veteran(s);
(ii) The management and daily business operations of which are controlled by one or more Veteran(s);
(iii) The business meets Federal small business size standards for the applicable North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code identified in the solicitation document;
(iv) The business has been verified for ownership and control pursuant to
38 U.S.C. 8127 and 13 CFR 128,
and is
certified and
listed in
the SBA certification database at
https://veterans.certify.sba.gov/
; and
(v) The business
agrees to
comply with
VAAR subpart 819.70
and Small Business Administration (SBA) regulations regarding small business size and government contracting
, and the Veterans Small Business Certification program at 13 CFR parts 121, 125, and 128
.
(2) “
Veteran
” is defined in 38 U.S.C. 101(2).
(3) The term "
small business concern
" has the meaning given that term under section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632).
(4) The term "
small business concern owned and controlled by Veterans
" has the meaning given that term under section 3(q)(3) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632(q)(3)), except that for a VA contract the firm must be
certified and
listed in the
SBA certification database
.
(5) The term “VOSB participant” or certified VOSB means a small business that has been certified as eligible to participate in the Veteran Small Business Certification Program and listed in the SBA certification database (see 13 CFR 128.102). It includes certified service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses (SDVOSBs).
(b)
General.
In order for a concern to submit an offer and be eligible for the award of a VOSB set-aside or sole source contract, the concern must qualify as a small business concern under the size standard corresponding to the NAICS code assigned to the contract and be certified and listed as a VOSB or SDVOSB participant in the certification database as set forth in 13 CFR 128.
(1) Offers received from entities that are
certified VOSBs or SDVOSBs and listed in the SBA certification database
at the time of offer shall not be considered.
(2) Any award resulting from this solicitation shall be made only to a
certified
VOSB who is eligible at the time of submission of offer(s) and at time of award.
(3) The requirements in this clause apply to any contract, order or subcontract where the firm receives a benefit or preference from its designation as a VOSB, including set-asides, sole source awards, and evaluation preferences.
(c)
Representation.
Pursuant to 38 U.S.C. 8127(e), only
certified
VOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
are considered eligible to receive award of a resulting contract. By submitting an offer, the prospective contractor represents that it is an eligible
and certified
VOSB as defined in this clause,
13 CFR 121, 125, and 128
, and
VAAR subpart 819.70
.
(d)
Agreement
/LOS certification
.
When awarded a contract action, including orders under multiple-award contracts, a VOSB agrees that in the performance of the contract, the VOSB shall comply with requirements in
VAAR subpart 819.70
and SBA regulations on
small business size,
and government contracting programs at 13 CFR parts 121 and 125, including the non-manufacturer rule and limitations on subcontracting
(LOS)
requirements in 13 CFR 121.406(b) and 125.6. For the purpose of the limitations on subcontracting, only
certified VOSBs listed in the SBA certification database,
(including independent contractors)
shall be
considered eligible and/or “similarly situated” (i.e., a firm that has the same small business program status as the prime contractor). An otherwise eligible firm further agrees to comply with the required
LOS
certification requirements in this solicitation (see
852.219-75
and/or
852.219-76
as applicable). These requirements are summarized as follows:
(1)
Services.
In the case of a contract for services (except construction), the VOSB prime contractor will not pay more than 50% of the amount paid by the government to the prime for contract performance to firms that are not
certified
VOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
(excluding direct costs to the extent they are not the principal purpose of the acquisition and the SDVOSB/VOSB does not provide the service, such as airline travel, cloud computing services, or mass media purchases). When a contract includes both services and supplies, the 50 percent limitation shall apply only to the service portion of the contract.
(2)
Supplies/products.
(i) In the case of a contract for supplies or products (other than from a non-manufacturer of such supplies), the VOSB prime contractor will not pay more than 50% of the amount paid by the government to the prime for contract performance, excluding the cost of materials, to firms that are not
certified
VOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
. When a contract includes both supply and services, the 50 percent limitation shall apply only to the supply portion of the contract.
(ii) In the case of a contract for supplies from a non-manufacturer, the VOSB prime contractor will supply the product of a domestic small business manufacturer or processor, unless a waiver as described in 13 CFR 121.406(b)(5) has been granted.Refer to 13 CFR 125.6(a)(2)(ii) for guidance pertaining to multiple item procurements.
(3)
General construction.
In the case of a contract for general construction, the VOSB prime contractor will not pay more than 85% of the amount paid by the government to the prime for contract performance, excluding the cost of materials, to firms that are not
certified
VOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
.
(4)
Special trade construction contractors.
In the case of a contract for special trade contractors, no more than 75% of the amount paid by the government to the prime for contract performance, excluding the cost of materials, may be paid to firms that are not
certified
VOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
.
(5)
Subcontracting.
A VOSB must meet the NAICS size standard assigned by the prime contractor and be listed in
the SBA certification database
to count as similarly situated. Any work that a first tier VIP-listed VOSB subcontractor further subcontracts will count towards the percent of subcontract amount that cannot be exceeded. For supply or construction contracts, the cost of materials is excluded and not considered to be subcontracted. When a contract includes both services and supplies, the 50 percent limitation shall apply only to the portion of the contract with the preponderance of the expenditure upon which the assigned NAICS is based. For information and more specific requirements, refer to 13 CFR 125.6.
(e)
Required limitations on subcontracting compliance measurement period.
A VOSB shall comply with the limitations on subcontracting as follows:
[
Contracting Officer check as appropriate.
]
____ By the end of the base term of the contract or order, and then by the end of each subsequent option period; or
____ By the end of the performance period for each order issued under the contract.
(f)
Joint ventures.
A joint venture may be considered eligible as a VOSB if the joint venture complies with the requirements in
13 CFR 128.402 and the managing joint venture partner makes the representations under paragraph (c) of this clause
. A joint venture agrees that, in the performance of the contract, the applicable percentage specified in paragraph (d) of this clause will be performed by the aggregate of the joint venture participants.
(g)
Precedence.
The VA Veterans First Contracting Program, as defined in
VAAR 802.101
,
subpart 819.70
, and this clause, takes precedence over any inconsistencies between the requirements of the SBA
Veteran Small Business Certification
Program and the VA Veterans First Contracting Program.
(h)
Misrepresentation.
Pursuant to 38 U.S.C. 8127(g), any business concern, including all its principals, that is determined by VA to have willfully and intentionally misrepresented a company’s VOSB status is subject to debarment from contracting with the Department for a period of not less than five years (see
VAAR 809.406-2
, Causes for Debarment).
(End of clause)
852.219-75  VA Notice of Limitations on Subcontracting—Certificate of Compliance for Services and Construction.
As prescribed in
819.7011(b)
, insert the following clause:
VA NOTICE OF LIMITATIONS ON SUBCONTRACTING—CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE FOR SERVICES AND CONSTRUCTION (JAN 2023) (DEVIATION)
(a) Pursuant to
38 U.S.C. 8127(l)(2)
, the offeror certifies that—
(1) If awarded a contract (see
FAR 2.101
definition), it will comply with the limitations on subcontracting requirement as provided in the solicitation and the resultant contract, as follows: [
Contracting Officer check the appropriate box below based on the predominant NAICS code assigned to the instant acquisition as set forth in
FAR 19.102
.
]
(i) [ ]
Services.
In the case of a contract for services (except construction), the contractor will not pay more than 50% of the amount paid by the government to it to firms that are not
certified
SDVOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
as set forth in
852.219-73
or
certified
VOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
as set forth in
852.219-74
. Any work that a similarly situated
certified SDVOSB/VOSB
subcontractor further subcontracts will count towards the 50% subcontract amount that cannot be exceeded. Other direct costs may be excluded to the extent they are not the principal purpose of the acquisition and small business concerns do not provide the service as set forth in 13 CFR 125.6.
(ii) [ ]
General construction.
In the case of a contract for general construction, the contractor will not pay more than 85% of the amount paid by the government to it to firms that are not
certified
SDVOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
as set forth in
852.219-73
or
certified
VOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
as set forth in
852.219-74
. Any work that a similarly situated
certified SDBOSB/VOSB
subcontractor further subcontracts will count towards the 85% subcontract amount that cannot be exceeded. Cost of materials are excluded and not considered to be subcontracted.
(iii) [ ] Special trade construction contractors. In the case of a contract for special trade contractors, the contractor will not pay more than 75% of the amount paid by the government to it to firms that are not
certified
SDVOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
as set forth in
852.219-73
or
certified
VOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
as set forth in
852.219-74
. Any work that a similarly situated
certified SDBOSB/VOSB
subcontractor further subcontracts will count towards the 75% subcontract amount that cannot be exceeded. Cost of materials are excluded and not considered to be subcontracted.
(2)The offeror acknowledges that this certification concerns a matter within the jurisdiction of an Agency of the United States.The offeror further acknowledges that this certification is subject to Title 18, United States Code, Section 1001, and, as such, a false, fictitious, or fraudulent certification may render the offeror subject to criminal, civil, or administrative penalties, including prosecution.
(3) If VA determines that an SDVOSB/VOSB awarded a contract pursuant to 38 U.S.C. 8127 did not act in good faith, such SDVOSB/VOSB shall be subject to any or all of the following:
(i) Referral to the VA Suspension and Debarment Committee;
(ii) A fine under section 16(g)(1) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 645(g)(1)); and
(iii) Prosecution for violating
18 U.S.C. 1001
.
(b)The offeror represents and understands that by submission of its offer and award of a contract it may be required to provide copies of documents or records to VA that VA may review to determine whether the offeror complied with the limitations on subcontracting requirement specified in the contract. Contracting officers may, at their discretion, require the contractor to demonstrate its compliance with the limitations on subcontracting at any time during performance and upon completion of a contract if the information regarding such compliance is not already available to the contracting officer. Evidence of compliance includes, but is not limited to, invoices, copies of subcontracts, or a list of the value of tasks performed.
(c)The offeror further agrees to cooperate fully and make available any documents or records as may be required to enable VA to determine compliance with the limitations on subcontracting requirement. The offeror understands that failure to provide documents as requested by VA may result in remedial action as the Government deems appropriate.
(d)Offeror completed certification/fill-in required. The formal certification must be completed, signed and returned with the offeror’s bid, quotation, or proposal. The Government will not consider offers for award from offerors that do not provide the certification, and all such responses will be deemed ineligible for evaluation and award.
Certification:
I hereby certify that if awarded the contract, [
insert name of offeror
] will comply with the limitations on subcontracting specified in this clause and in the resultant contract.I further certify that I am authorized to execute this certification on behalf of [
insert name of offeror
].
Printed Name of Signee:
________________________________________
Printed Title of Signee:
_________________________________________
Signature:
___________________________________________________
Date:
_____________________
Company Name and Address:
______________________________________
________________________________________________________________
(End of clause)
852.219-76  VA Notice of Limitations on Subcontracting—Certificate of Compliance for Supplies and Products.
As prescribed in
819.7011(c)
, insert the following clause. The contracting officer shall tailor the clause in paragraph (a)(2)(iii) as appropriate:
VA NOTICE OF LIMITATIONS ON SUBCONTRACTING—CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE FOR SUPPLIES AND PRODUCTS (JAN 2023) (DEVIATION)
(a)Pursuant to
38 U.S.C. 8127(l)(2)
, the offeror certifies that—
(1)If awarded a contract (see FAR 2.101 definition), it will comply with the limitations on subcontracting requirement as provided in the solicitation and the resultant contract, as follows: [
Offeror check the appropriate box
]
(i) [ ] In the case of a contract for supplies or products (other than from a non-manufacturer of such supplies), it will not pay more than 50% of the amount paid by the government to it to firms that are not
certified
SDVOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
as set forth in
852.219-73
or
certified
VOSBs
listed in the SBA certification database
as set forth in
852.219-74
. Any work that a similarly situated
certified SDBOSB/VOSB
subcontractor further subcontracts will count towards the 50% subcontract amount that cannot be exceeded. Cost of materials are excluded and not considered to be subcontracted.
(ii) [ ] In the case of a contract for supplies from a nonmanufacturer, it will supply the product of a domestic small business manufacturer or processor, unless a waiver as described in 13 CFR 121.406(b)(5) is granted. The offeror understands that, as provided in 13 CFR 121.406(b)(7), such a waiver has no effect on requirements external to the Small Business Act, such as the Buy American Act or the Trade Agreements Act.
(2) Manufacturer or nonmanufacturer representation and certification. [
Offeror fill-in—check each applicable box below. The offeror must select the applicable provision below, identifying itself as either a manufacturer or nonmanufacturer
]:
(i) [ ]
Manufacturer or producer.
The offeror certifies that it is the manufacturer or producer of the end item being procured, and the end item is manufactured or produced in the United States, in accordance with paragraph (a)(1)(i).
(ii) [ ]
Nonmanufacturer.
The offeror certifies that it qualifies as a nonmanufacturer in accordance with the requirements of 13 CFR 121.406(b) and paragraph (a)(1)(ii).The offeror further certifies it meets each element below as required in order to qualify as a nonmanufacturer. [
Offeror fill-in—check each box below.
]
[ ] The offeror certifies that it does not exceed 500 employees (or 150 employees for the Information Technology Value Added Reseller exception to NAICS code 541519, which is found at 13 CFR 121.201, footnote 18).
[ ] The offeror certifies that it is primarily engaged in the retail or wholesale trade and normally sells the type of item being supplied.
[ ] The offeror certifies that it will take ownership or possession of the item(s) with its personnel, equipment, or facilities in a manner consistent with industry practice.
(iii) [ ] The offeror certifies that it will supply the end item of a small business manufacturer, processor, or producer made in the United States, unless a waiver as provided in 13 CFR 121.406(b)(5) has been issued by SBA. [
Contracting Officer fill-in or removal (see 13 CFR 121.1205). This requirement must be included for a single end item. However, if SBA has issued an applicable waiver of the nonmanufacturer rule for the end item, this requirement must be removed in the final solicitation or contract.
]
or [
Contracting officer tailor clause to remove one or other block under subparagraph (iii).
]
[ ] If this is a multiple item acquisition, the offeror certifies that at least 50% of the estimated contract value is composed of items that are manufactured by small business concerns.[
Contracting Officer fill-in or removal. See 13 CFR 121.406(d) for multiple end items. If SBA has issued an applicable nonmanufacturer rule waiver, this requirement must be removed in the final solicitation or contract.
]
(3)The offeror acknowledges that this certification concerns a matter within the jurisdiction of an Agency of the United States.The offeror further acknowledges that this certification is subject to Title 18, United States Code, Section 1001, and, as such, a false, fictitious, or fraudulent certification may render the offeror subject to criminal, civil, or administrative penalties, including prosecution.
(4)If VA determines that an SDVOSB/VOSB awarded a contract pursuant to 38 U.S.C. 8127 did not act in good faith, such SDVOSB/VOSB shall be subject to any or all of the following:
(i) Referral to the VA Suspension and Debarment Committee;
(ii) A fine under section 16(g)(1) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 645(g)(1)); and
(iii) Prosecution for violating
18 U.S.C. 1001
.
(b) The offeror represents and understands that by submission of its offer and award of a contract it may be required to provide copies of documents or records to VA that VA may review to determine whether the offeror complied with the limitations on subcontracting requirement specified in the contract or to determine whether the offeror qualifies as a manufacturer or nonmanufacturer in compliance with the limitations on subcontracting requirement. Contracting officers may, at their discretion, require the contractor to demonstrate its compliance with the limitations on subcontracting at any time during performance and upon completion of a contract if the information regarding such compliance is not already available to the contracting officer. Evidence of compliance includes, but is not limited to, invoices, copies of subcontracts, or a list of the value of tasks performed.
(c)The offeror further agrees to cooperate fully and make available any documents or records as may be required to enable VA to determine compliance.The offeror understands that failure to provide documents as requested by VA may result in remedial action as the Government deems appropriate.
(d) Offeror completed certification/fill-in required. The formal certification must be completed, signed and returned with the offeror’s bid, quotation, or proposal.The Government will not consider offers for award from offerors that do not provide the certification, and all such responses will be deemed ineligible for evaluation and award.
Certification:
I hereby certify that if awarded the contract, [
insert name of offeror
] will comply with the limitations on subcontracting specified in this clause and in the resultant contract.I further certify that I am authorized to execute this certification on behalf of [
insert name of offeror
].
Printed Name of Signee:
________________________________________
Printed Title of Signee:
_________________________________________
Signature:
___________________________________________________
Date:
_____________________
Company Name and Address:
______________________________________
________________________________________________________________
(End of clause)
852.222-70  Contract Work-Hours and Safety Standards–Nursing Home Care for Veterans.
As prescribed in
822.305
, for nursing home care requirements, insert the following clause:
CONTRACT WORK HOURS AND SAFETY STANDARDS—NURSING HOME CARE FOR VETERANS (MAY 2018)
(a) No Contractor and subcontractor under this contract shall prohibit the payment of overtime wages to their employees for work in excess of 40 hours in any workweek, which would otherwise be a violation of Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards (the statute) (40 U.S.C. 3701,et seq.), provided—
(1) The Contractor or subcontractor is primarily engaged in the care of nursing home patients residing on the contractor’s or subcontractor’s premises;
(2) There is an agreement or understanding between the Contractor or subcontractor and their employees, before performance of work, that a work period of 14 consecutive days is acceptable in lieu of a work period of 7 consecutive days for the purpose of overtime compensation;
(3) Employees receive overtime compensation at a rate no less than 1 1/2 times the employees’ regular hourly rate of pay for work in excess of 80 hours in any 14 day period; and
(4) Pay is otherwise computed in accordance with the requirements of the
Fair Labor Standards Act
of 1938, as amended.
(b)
Subcontracts
.  The Contractor shall insert the text of this clause, including this paragraph (b), in subcontracts that at any subcontract tier.  The Contractor shall be responsible for compliance by any subcontractor or lower-tier subcontractor with the provisions set forth in paragraphs (a) through (b) of this clause.
(End of clause)
852.222-71, Compliance with Executive Order 13899. (DEVIATION) (APR 2025)
As prescribed in
822.810(h)
, insert the following clause:
Compliance with Executive Order 13899. (DEVIATION) (APR 2025)
(a)The contractor shall comply with Executive Order 13899, Combating Anti-Semitism, pursuant to Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VI), 42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.
(b)The contractor shall timely disclose, in writing, to the Contracting Officer, whenever, in connection with the award, performance, or closeout of this contract or any subcontract thereunder, the Contractor has credible evidence that a principal, employee, agent, or subcontractor of the Contractor has committed a violation under Executive Order 13899, Combatting Anti-Semitism pursuant to the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VI), 42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.
(c)The contractor shall include the terms and conditions of this clause in every subcontract or purchase order so that these terms will be binding on every subcontractor or vendor.
(End of clause)
852.223-70  Instructions to Offerors-Sustainable Acquisition Plan.
As prescribed in
823.103-71
, when the Contracting Officer deems a Sustainable Acquisition Plan necessary, the Contracting Officer shall insert the following provision:
INSTRUCTIONS TO OFFERORS-SUSTAINABLE ACQUISITION PLAN (SEP 2019)
Offerors shall include a Sustainable Acquisition Plan in their technical proposals. The plan must describe the approach and quality assurance mechanisms for applying
FAR subpart 23.1
, Sustainable Acquisition Policy and other Federal laws, regulations and Executive Orders governing sustainable acquisition. The plan shall clearly identify those products and services included in the proposal.
(End of provision)
852.223-71  Safety and Health.
As prescribed in
823.303-70
, the Contracting Officer shall insert the following clause:
SAFETY AND HEALTH (SEP 2019)
(a) To help ensure the protection of the life and health of all persons, and to help prevent damage to property, the Contractor shall comply with all Federal, State, and local laws and regulations applicable to the work being performed under this contract. These laws are implemented or enforced by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and other regulatory/enforcement agencies at the Federal, State, and local levels.
(1) Additionally, the Contractor shall comply with the following regulations when developing and implementing health and safety operating procedures and practices for both personnel and facilities involving the use or handling of hazardous materials and the conduct of research, development, or test projects:
(i) 29 CFR 1910.1030, Blood-borne pathogens; 29 CFR 1910.1450, Occupational exposure to hazardous chemicals in laboratories. These regulations are available at
https://www.osha.gov/
.
(ii) Nuclear Regulatory Commission Standards and Regulations, pursuant to the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5801 et seq.) Copies are available from the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555-0001.
(2) The following Government guidelines are recommended for developing and implementing health and safety operating procedures and practices for both personnel and facilities:
(i) Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), available at
http://www.cdc.gov/biosafety/publications/index.htm
.
(ii) Prudent Practices in the Laboratory, National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington, DC 20001, available at
http://www.nap.edu
.
(b)(1) The Contractor shall maintain an accurate record of, and promptly report to the Contracting Officer, all accidents or incidents resulting in the exposure of persons to toxic substances, hazardous materials or hazardous operations; the injury or death of any person; or damage to property incidental to work performed under the contract resulting from toxic or hazardous materials and resulting in any or all violations for which the Contractor has been cited by any Federal, State or local regulatory/enforcement agency.
(2) The report shall include a copy of the notice of violation and the findings of any inquiry or inspection, and an analysis addressing the impact these violations may have on the work remaining to be performed. The report shall also state the required action(s), if any, to be taken to correct any violation(s) noted by the Federal, State, or local regulatory/enforcement agency and the time frame allowed by the agency to accomplish the necessary corrective action.
(c) If the Contractor fails or refuses to comply with the Federal, State or local regulatory/enforcement agency’s directive(s) regarding any violation(s) and prescribed corrective action(s), the Contracting Officer may issue an order stopping all or part of the work until satisfactory corrective action (as approved by the Federal, State, or local regulatory/enforcement agencies) has been taken and documented to the Contracting Officer. No part of the time lost due to any such stop work order shall form the basis for a request for extension or costs or damages by the Contractor.
(d) The Contractor shall insert this clause in each subcontract involving toxic substances, hazardous materials, or hazardous operations. The Contractor is responsible for the compliance of its subcontractors with the provisions of this clause.
(End of clause)
852.228-70  Bond Premium Adjustment.
As prescribed in
828.106-70
, insert the following clause:
BOND PREMIUM ADJUSTMENT (JAN 2008)
When net changes in original contract price affect the premium of a Corporate Surety Bond by $5 or more, the Government, in determining the basis for final settlement, will provide for bond premium adjustment computed at the rate shown in the bond.
(End of clause)
852.228-71  Indemnification and insurance.
As prescribed in
828.306
, insert the following clause:
INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE (MAR 2018)
(a)
Indemnification
.  The contractor expressly agrees to indemnify and save the Government, its officers, agents, servants, and employees harmless from and against any and all claims, loss, damage, injury, and liability, however caused, resulting from, arising out of, or in any way connected with the performance of work under this contract.  Further, it is agreed that any negligence or alleged negligence of the Government, its officers, agents, servants, and employees, shall not be a bar to a claim for indemnification unless the act or omission of the Government, its officers, agents, servants, and employees is the sole, competent, and producing cause of such claims, loss, damage, injury, and liability.  At the option of the contractor, and subject to the approval by the contracting officer, insurance coverage may be employed as guaranty of indemnification.
(b)
Insurance
.  Satisfactory insurance coverage is a condition precedent to award of this contract.  In general, a successful bidder must present satisfactory evidence of full compliance with State and local requirements, or those below stipulated, whichever are the greater.  More specifically, workers’ compensation and employer’s liability coverage will conform to applicable State law requirements for the service defined, whereas general liability and automobile liability of comprehensive type shall, in the absence of higher statutory minimums, be required in the amounts per vehicle used of not less than $200,000 per person and $500,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and $20,000 per occurrence for property damage.  State-approved sources of insurance coverage ordinarily will be deemed acceptable to the Department of Veterans Affairs, subject to timely certifications by such sources of the types and limits of the coverages afforded by the sources to the bidder.  [Contracting Officer’s Note:  In those instances where airplane service is to be used, substitute the word “aircraft” for “automobile” and “vehicle” and modify coverage to require aircraft public and passenger liability insurance of at least $200,000 per passenger and $500,000 per occurrence for bodily injury, other than passenger liability, and $200,000 per occurrence for property damage.  Coverage for passenger liability bodily injury shall be at least $200,000 multiplied by the number of seats or passengers, whichever is greater.]
(End of clause)
852.228-72  Assisting Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned and Veteran-Owned Small Businesses in Obtaining Bonds.
As prescribed in
828.106-71
, insert the following clause:
ASSISTING SERVICE-DISABLED VETERAN-OWNED AND VETERAN-OWNED SMALL BUSINESSES IN OBTAINING BONDS (DEC 2009)
Prime contractors are encouraged to assist service-disabled veteran-owned and veteran-owned small business potential subcontractors in obtaining bonding, when required.  Mentor firms are encouraged to assist protégé firms under VA’s Mentor-Protégé Program in obtaining acceptable bid, payment, and performance bonds, when required, as a prime contractor under a solicitation or contract and in obtaining any required bonds under subcontracts.
(End of clause)
852.228-73  Indemnification of Contractor—Hazardous Research Projects.
As prescribed in
828.7003
, insert the following clause:
INDEMNIFICATION OF CONTRACTOR—HAZARDOUS RESEARCH PROJECTS (MAR 2018)
(a) This contract involves work with a risk of an unusually hazardous nature as specifically defined in the contract.  The government shall indemnify the Contractor, including subcontractors of any tier, against losses or liability specified in paragraphs
(b)
and
(c)
of this clause if:
(1) The losses or liability arise out of or results from a risk defined in this contract as unusually hazardous, and.
(2) The losses or liability are not covered by the financial protection required by paragraph
(c)
.
(b) The Government shall indemnify a Contractor for:
(1) Liability (including reasonable expenses of litigation or settlement) to third persons for death, bodily injury, or loss of or damage to property from a risk that the contract defines as unusually hazardous.  This indemnification shall not cover liability under State or Federal worker’s injury compensation laws to employees of the Contractor who are both:
(i) Employed at the site of the contract work; and
(ii) Working on the contract for which indemnification is granted.
(2) The Government shall also indemnify the Contractor for loss of or damage to property of the Contractor from a risk that the contract defines as unusually hazardous.
(c) A Contractor shall have and maintain an amount of financial protection to cover liability to third persons and loss of or damage to the Contractor’s property.  Financial protection may include private insurance, private contractual indemnities, self-insurance, other proof of financial responsibility, or a combination that provides the maximum amount required.  The financial protection provided must meet one of the following:
(1) The maximum amount of insurance available from private sources, or
(2) A lesser amount that the Secretary establishes after taking into consideration the cost and terms of private insurance.
(d) Actions in event of a claim:
(1) The Contractor shall notify the Contracting Officer of any claim or suit against the Contractor for death, bodily injury, or loss of or damage to property; and
(2) The Government may elect to control or assist in the defense of any suit or claim for which indemnification is provided in the contract.
(End of clause)
852.229-70 and 852.229-71  [Reserved]
852.232-70  Payments Under Fixed-Price Construction Contracts (Without NAS-CPM).
As prescribed in
832.111-70
, insert the following clause in contracts that do not contain a section entitled “Network Analysis System-Critical Path Method (NAS-CPM):”
PAYMENTS UNDER FIXED-PRICE CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS (WITHOUT NAS-CPM) (NOV 2018)
The clause
FAR 52.232-5
, Payments Under Fixed-Price Construction Contracts, is implemented as follows:
(a) Retainage:
(1) The Contracting Officer may retain funds—
(i) Where performance under the contract has been determined to be deficient or the Contractor has performed in an unsatisfactory manner in the past; or
(ii) As the contract nears completion, to ensure that deficiencies will be corrected and that completion is timely.
(2) Examples of deficient performance justifying a retention of funds include, but are not restricted to, the following—
(i) Unsatisfactory progress as determined by the Contracting Officer;
(ii) Failure to meet schedule in Schedule of Work Progress;
(iii) Failure to present submittals in a timely manner; or
(iv) Failure to comply in good faith with approved subcontracting plans, certifications, or contract requirements.
(3) Any level of retention shall not exceed 10 percent either where there is determined to be unsatisfactory performance, or when the retainage is to ensure satisfactory completion.  Retained amounts shall be paid promptly upon completion of all contract requirements, but nothing contained in this paragraph (a)(3) shall be construed as limiting the Contracting Officer’s right to withhold funds under other provisions of the contract or in accordance with the general law and regulations regarding the administration of Government contracts.
(b) The Contractor shall submit a schedule of cost to the Contracting Officer for approval within 30 calendar days after date of receipt of notice to proceed.  Such schedule will be signed and submitted in triplicate.  The approved cost schedule will be one of the bases for determining progress payments to the Contractor for work completed.  This schedule shall show cost by the work activity/event for each building or unit of the contract, as instructed by the resident engineer.
(1) The work activities/events shall be subdivided into as many sub-activities/events as are necessary to cover all component parts of the contract work.
(2) Costs as shown on this schedule must be true costs and the resident engineer may require the Contractor to submit the original estimate sheets or other information to substantiate the detailed makeup of the schedule.
(3) The sums of the sub-activities/events, as applied to each work activity/event, shall equal the total cost of such work activity/event.  The total cost of all work activities/events shall equal the contract price.
(4) Insurance and similar items shall be prorated and included in the cost of each branch of the work.
(5) The cost schedule shall include separate cost information for the systems listed in the table in this paragraph (b)(5).  The percentages listed below are proportions of the cost listed in the Contractor’s cost schedule and identify, for payment purposes, the value of the work to adjust, correct and test systems after the material has been installed.  Payment of the listed percentages will be made only after the Contractor has demonstrated that each of the systems is substantially complete and operates as required by the contract.
VALUE OF ADJUSTING, CORRECTING, AND TESTING SYSTEM
System
Percent
Pneumatic tube system
10
Incinerators (medical waste and trash)
5
Sewage treatment plant equipment
5
Water treatment plant equipment
5
Washers (dish, cage, glass, etc.)
5
Sterilizing equipment
5
Water distilling equipment
5
Prefab temperature rooms (cold, constant temperature)
5
Entire air-conditioning system (Specified under 600 Sections)
5
Entire boiler plant system (Specified under 700 Sections)
5
General supply conveyors
10
Food service conveyors
10
Pneumatic soiled linen and trash system
10
Elevators and dumbwaiters
10
Materials transport system
10
Engine-generator system
5
Primary switchgear
5
Secondary switchgear
5
Fire alarm system
5
Nurse call system
5
Intercom system
5
Radio system
5
TV (entertainment) system
5
(c) In addition to this cost schedule, the Contractor shall submit such unit costs as may be specifically requested.  The unit costs shall be those used by the Contractor in preparing its bid and will not be binding as pertaining to any contract changes.
(d) The Contracting Officer will consider for monthly progress payments material and/or equipment procured by the Contractor and stored on the construction site, as space is available, or at a local approved location off the site, under such terms and conditions as the Contracting Officer approves, including but not limited to the following—
(1) The materials or equipment are in accordance with the contract requirements and/or approved samples and shop drawings;
(2) The materials and/or equipment are approved by the resident engineer;
(3) The materials and/or equipment are stored separately and are readily available for inspection and inventory by the resident engineer;
(4) The materials and/or equipment are protected against weather, theft and other hazards and are not subjected to deterioration; and
(5) The Contractor obtains the concurrence of its surety for off-site storage.
(e) The Government reserves the right to withhold payment until samples, shop drawings, engineer’s certificates, additional bonds, payrolls, weekly statements of compliance, proof of title, nondiscrimination compliance reports, or any other requirements of this contract, have been submitted to the satisfaction of the Contracting Officer.
(f) The Contracting Officer will notify the Contractor in writing within 10 calendar-days of exercising retainage against any payment in accordance with
FAR clause 52.232-5(e)
.  The notice shall disclose the amount of the retainage in value and percent retained from the payment, and provide explanation for the retainage.
(End of clause)
Alternate I
(NOV 2018).  If the specifications include guarantee period services, the Contracting Officer shall include the following paragraphs as additions to paragraph (b) of the basic clause:
(6)
(i) The Contractor shall at the time of contract award furnish the total cost of the guarantee period services in accordance with specification section(s) covering guarantee period services.  The Contractor shall submit, within 15 calendar days of receipt of the notice to proceed, a guarantee period performance program that shall include an itemized accounting of the number of work-hours required to perform the guarantee period service on each piece of equipment.  The Contractor shall also submit the established salary costs, including employee fringe benefits, and what the Contractor reasonably expects to pay over the guarantee period, all of which will be subject to the Contracting Officer’s approval.
(ii) The cost of the guarantee period service shall be prorated on an annual basis and paid in equal monthly payments by VA during the period of guarantee.  In the event the installer does not perform satisfactorily during this period, all payments may be withheld and the Contracting Officer shall inform the Contractor of the unsatisfactory performance, allowing the Contractor 10 days to correct deficiencies and comply with the contract.  The guarantee period service is subject to those provisions as set forth in the Payments and Default clauses.
852.232-71  Payments Under Fixed-Price Construction Contracts (Including NAS-CPM).
As prescribed in
832.111-70
, insert the following clause in contracts that contain a section entitled “Network Analysis System-Critical Path Method (NAS-CPM):”
PAYMENTS UNDER FIXED-PRICE CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS (INCLUDING NAS-CPM) (NOV 2018)
The clause entitled “Payments Under Fixed-Price Construction Contracts” in
FAR 52.232-5
is implemented as follows:
(a) Retainage:
(1) The Contracting Officer may retain funds—
(i) Where performance under the contract has been determined to be deficient or the Contractor has performed in an unsatisfactory manner in the past; or
(ii) As the contract nears completion, to ensure that deficiencies will be corrected and that completion is timely.
(2) Examples of deficient performance justifying a retention of funds include, but are not restricted to, the following—
(i) Unsatisfactory progress as determined by the Contracting Officer;
(ii) Failure to meet schedule in Schedule of Work Progress;
(iii) Failure to present submittals in a timely manner; or
(iv) Failure to comply in good faith with approved subcontracting plans, certifications, or contract requirements.
(3) Any level of retention shall not exceed 10 percent either where there is determined to be unsatisfactory performance, or when the retainage is to ensure satisfactory completion.  Retained amounts shall be paid promptly upon completion of all contract requirements, but nothing contained in this paragraph (a)(3) shall be construed as limiting the Contracting Officer’s right to withhold funds under other provisions of the contract or in accordance with the general law and regulations regarding the administration of Government contracts.
(b) The Contractor shall submit a schedule of costs in accordance with the requirements of section “Network Analysis System—Critical Path Method (NAS-CPM)” to the Contracting Officer for approval within 90 calendar days after date of receipt of notice to proceed.  The approved cost schedule will be one of the bases for determining progress payments to the Contractor for work completed.
(1) Costs as shown on this schedule must be true costs and the resident engineer may require the Contractor to submit its original estimate sheets or other information to substantiate the detailed makeup of the cost schedule.
(2) The total costs of all work activities/events shall equal the contract price.
(3) Insurance and similar items shall be prorated and included in each work activity/event cost of the critical path method (CPM).
(4) The CPM shall include a separate cost loaded activity for adjusting and testing of the systems listed in the table in paragraph (b)(5) of this section.  The percentages listed below will be used to determine the cost of adjust and test work activities/events and identify, for payment purposes, the value of the work to adjust, correct and test systems after the material has been installed.
(5) Payment for adjust and test activities will be made only after the Contractor has demonstrated that each of the systems is substantially complete and operates as required by the contract.
VALUE OF ADJUSTING, CORRECTING, AND TESTING SYSTEM
System
Percent
Pneumatic tube system
10
Incinerators (medical waste and trash)
5
Sewage treatment plant equipment
5
Water treatment plant equipment
5
Washers (dish, cage, glass, etc.)
5
Sterilizing equipment
5
Water distilling equipment
5
Prefab temperature rooms (cold, constant temperature)
5
Entire air-conditioning system (Specified under 600 Sections)
5
Entire boiler plant system (Specified under 700 Sections)
5
General supply conveyors
10
Food service conveyors
10
Pneumatic soiled linen and trash system
10
Elevators and dumbwaiters
10
Materials transport system
10
Engine-generator system
5
Primary switchgear
5
Secondary switchgear
5
Fire alarm system
5
Nurse call system
5
Intercom system
5
Radio system
5
TV (entertainment) system
5
(c) In addition to this cost schedule, the Contractor shall submit such unit costs as may be specifically requested.  The unit costs shall be those used by the Contractor in preparing its bid and will not be binding as pertaining to any contract changes.
(d) The Contracting Officer will consider for monthly progress payments material and/or equipment procured by the Contractor and stored on the construction site, as space is available, or at a local approved location off the site, under such terms and conditions as the Contracting Officer approves, including but not limited to the following—
(1) The materials or equipment are in accordance with the contract requirements and/or approved samples and shop drawings;
(2) The materials and/or equipment are approved by the resident engineer;
(3) The materials and/or equipment are stored separately and are readily available for inspection and inventory by the resident engineer;
(4) The materials and/or equipment are protected against weather, theft and other hazards and are not subjected to deterioration; and
(5) The Contractor obtains the concurrence of its surety for off-site storage.
(e) The Government reserves the right to withhold payment until samples, shop drawings, engineer’s certificates, additional bonds, payrolls, weekly statements of compliance, proof of title, nondiscrimination compliance reports, or any other requirements of this contract, have been submitted to the satisfaction of the Contracting Officer.
(f) The Contracting Officer will notify the Contractor in writing within 10 calendar-days of exercising retainage against any payment in accordance with
FAR clause 52.232-5(e)
.  The notice shall disclose the amount of the retainage in value and percent retained from the payment, and provide explanation for the retainage.
(End of clause)
Alternate I
(NOV 2018).  If the specifications include guarantee period services, the Contracting Officer shall include the following paragraphs as additions to paragraph (b) of the basic clause:
(6)
(i) The Contractor shall show on the critical path method (CPM) the total cost of the guarantee period services in accordance with the guarantee period service section(s) of the specifications.  This cost shall be priced out when submitting the CPM cost loaded network.  The cost submitted shall be subject to the approval of the Contracting Officer. The activity on the CPM shall have money only and not activity time.
(ii) The Contractor shall submit with the CPM a guarantee period performance program which shall include an itemized accounting of the number of work-hours required to perform the guarantee period service on each piece of equipment.  The Contractor shall also submit the established salary costs, including employee fringe benefits, and what the Contractor reasonably expects to pay over the guarantee period, all of which will be subject to the Contracting Officer’s approval.
(iii) The cost of the guarantee period service shall be prorated on an annual basis and paid in equal monthly payments by VA during the period of guarantee.  In the event the installer does not perform satisfactorily during this period, all payments may be withheld and the Contracting Officer shall inform the Contractor of the unsatisfactory performance, allowing the Contractor 10 days to correct and comply with the contract.  The guarantee period service is subject to those provisions as set forth in the Payments and Default clauses
852.232-72  Electronic Submission of Payment Requests.
As prescribed in
832.7001-2
, insert the following clause:
ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF PAYMENT REQUESTS (NOV 2018)
(a)
Definitions.
As used in this clause-
(1)
Contract financing payment
has the meaning given in
FAR 32.001
.
(2)
Designated agency office
means the office designated by the purchase order, agreement, or contract to first receive and review invoices.  This office can be contractually designated as the receiving entity.  This office may be different from the office issuing the payment;
(3)
Electronic form
means an automated system transmitting information electronically according to the accepted electronic data transmission methods and formats identified in paragraph
(c)
of this clause.  Facsimile, e-mail, and scanned documents are not acceptable electronic forms for submission of payment requests;
(4)
Invoice payment
has the meaning given in
FAR 32.001
; and
(5)
Payment request
means any request for contract financing payment or invoice payment submitted by the Contractor under this contract.
(b)
Electronic payment requests.
Except as provided in paragraph
(e)
of this clause, the Contractor shall submit payment requests in electronic form.  Purchases paid with a Government-wide commercial purchase card are considered to be an electronic transaction for purposes of this rule, and therefore no additional electronic invoice submission is required.
(c)
Data transmission.
A Contractor must ensure that the data transmission method and format are through one of the following:
(1)  VA’s Electronic Invoice Presentment and Payment System at the current website address provided in the contract.
(2)  Any system that conforms to the X12 electronic data interchange (EDI) formats established by the Accredited Standards Center (ASC) and chartered by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
(d)  Invoice requirements.  Invoices shall comply with
FAR 32.905
.
(e)
Exceptions.
If, based on one of the circumstances below, the Contracting Officer directs that payment requests be made by mail, the Contractor shall submit payment requests by mail through the United States Postal Service to the designated agency office.  Submission of payment requests by mail may be required for—
(1)  Awards made to foreign vendors for work performed outside the United States;
(2)  Classified contracts or purchases when electronic submission and processing of payment requests could compromise the safeguarding of classified or privacy information;
(3)  Contracts awarded by contracting officers in the conduct of emergency operations, such as responses to national emergencies;
(4)  Solicitations or contracts in which the designated agency office is a VA entity other than the VA Financial Services Center in Austin, Texas; or
(5)  Solicitations or contracts in which the VA designated agency office does not have electronic invoicing capability as described above.
(End of clause)
852.233-70  Protest Content/Alternative Dispute Resolution.
As prescribed in
833.106-70(a)
, insert the following provision:
PROTEST CONTENT/ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION (SEP 2018)
(a) Any protest filed by an interested party shall–
(1) Include the name, address, fax number, and telephone number of the protester;
(2) Identify the solicitation and/or contract number;
(3) Include an original signed by the protester or the protester's representative and at least one copy;
(4) Set forth a detailed statement of the legal and factual grounds of the protest, including a description of resulting prejudice to the protester, and provide copies of relevant documents;
(5) Specifically request a ruling of the individual upon whom the protest is served;
(6) State the form of relief requested; and
(7) Provide all information establishing the timeliness of the protest.
(b) Failure to comply with the above may result in dismissal of the protest without further consideration.
(c) Bidders/offerors and Contracting Officers are encouraged to use alternative dispute resolution (ADR) procedures to resolve protests at any stage in the protest process.  If ADR is used, the Department of Veterans Affairs will not furnish any documentation in an ADR proceeding beyond what is allowed by the
Federal Acquisition Regulation
.
(End of provision)
852.233-71  Alternate Protest Procedure.
As prescribed in
833.106-70(b)
, insert the following provision:
ALTERNATE PROTEST PROCEDURE (SEP 2018)
(a) As an alternative to filing a protest with the Contracting Officer, an interested party may file a protest by mail or electronically with:  Executive Director, Office of Acquisition and Logistics, Risk Management and Compliance Service (003A2C), Department of Veterans Affairs, 810 Vermont Avenue, NW, Washington, DC20420 or Email:
EDProtests@va.gov
.
(b) The protest will not be considered if the interested party has a protest on the same or similar issue(s) pending with the Contracting Officer.
(End of provision)
852.235-70  Research Misconduct.
As prescribed at
835.003-71
, insert the following clause:
RESEARCH MISCONDUCT (DEC 2022)
(a) The Contractor is responsible for maintaining the integrity of research performed pursuant to this contract award including the prevention, detection and remediation of research misconduct as defined in
835.001-70
.
(b) The Contractor shall notify the Contracting Officer within 7 business days of any research misconduct allegations received by the facility concerning this contract award.
(c) The Contractor shall conduct an initial inquiry into any allegation of research misconduct. If the Contractor determines that there is sufficient evidence to proceed to an investigation, the Contractor shall notify the Contracting Officer and, unless otherwise instructed shall—
(1) Conduct an investigation to develop a complete factual record and an examination of such record leading to either a finding of research misconduct and an identification of appropriate remedies, or a recommendation that no further action is warranted;
(2) When the investigation results in a research misconduct finding, ensure the matter is adjudicated by a responsible official who was not involved in the inquiry or investigation and is organizationally separated from the element which conducted the investigation. The adjudication shall include a review of the investigation record and a recommendation of appropriate corrective actions and sanctions; and
(3) When an investigation is complete, the Contractor shall forward to the Contracting Officer a copy of the evidentiary record, the investigative report, any recommendations made to the Contractor’s adjudicating official, the adjudicating official’s recommendation and notification of any proposed corrective action, and the subject’s written response, if any. The Contracting Officer will review the documentation to determine whether the proposed corrective action can proceed.
(d) The VA may elect to act in lieu of the Contractor in conducting an inquiry or investigation into an allegation of research misconduct if the Contracting Officer finds that—
(1) The research organization is not prepared to handle the allegation in a manner consistent with this clause and it is believed it cannot reasonably conduct the inquiry;
(2) VA involvement is necessary to ensure the public health, safety, and security, or to prevent harm to the public interest; or
(3) The allegation involves possible criminal misconduct.
(e) The Contractor shall provide safeguards for information received and protect informants, witnesses and respondents of allegations as follows:
(1) The Contractor shall provide safeguards to ensure that individuals may bring allegations of research misconduct made in good faith to the attention of the Contractor without suffering retribution. Safeguards include: protection against retaliation; fair and objective procedures for examining and resolving allegations; and diligence in protecting positions and reputations.
(2) The Contractor shall also assure the respondent that their rights are protected and that the mere filing of an allegation of research misconduct will not result in an adverse action. Safeguards include timely written notice regarding substantive allegations against them, a description of the allegations and reasonable access to any evidence submitted to support each allegation. Respondents must be given the opportunity to prepare a response to an allegation and notice of any findings of research misconduct.
(f)
Objectivity and expertise
. The Contractor shall select individual(s) to inquire, investigate, and adjudicate allegations of research misconduct who have appropriate expertise and have no unresolved conflict of interest. The individual(s) who conducts the adjudication must not be the same individual(s) who conducted the inquiry or investigation and must be separate organizationally from the element that conducted the inquiry or investigation.
(End of clause)
852.235-71  Protection of Human Subjects.
As prescribed at
835.003-72
, insert the following clause:
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS (DEC 2022)
(a) Research involving human subjects is not permitted under this award unless expressly authorized in writing by the Contracting Officer. Such authorization will specify the details of the approved research involving human subjects and will be incorporated by reference into this contract.
(b) The Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects (the “Common Rule”), adopted by VA (see 38 CFR Part 16), requires Contractors to maintain appropriate policies and procedures for the protection of human subjects in research. The Common Rule defines a “human subject” as a living individual about whom an investigator conducting research obtains data through intervention or interaction with the individual, or identifiable private information. The term “research” means a systematic investigation, including research development and/or testing and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to generalized knowledge. The Common Rule also sets forth categories of research that may be considered exempt from 15 CFR Part 27. These categories may be found at 15 CFR 27.101.
(c) Should research involving human subjects be included in the proposal, prior to issuance of an award, the Contractor shall submit the following documentation to the Contracting Officer:
(1) Documentation to verify that the Contractor has established a relationship with an appropriate Institutional Review Board (“cognizant IRB”). An appropriate IRB is one that is located within the United States and within the community in which the research will be conducted;
(2) Documentation to verify that the cognizant IRB possesses a valid registration with the United States Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Human Research Protections (“OHRP”);
(3) Documentation to verify that the Contractor has a valid Federal-wide Assurance (FWA) issued by OHRP.
(d) Prior to starting any research involving human subjects, the Contractor shall submit appropriate documentation to the Contracting Officer for institutional review and approval. This documentation may include:
(1) Copies of the research protocol, all questionnaires, surveys, advertisements, and informed consent forms approved by the cognizant IRB;
(2) Documentation of approval for the research protocol, questionnaires, surveys, advertisements, and informed consent forms by the cognizant IRB;
(3) Documentation of continuing IRB approval by the cognizant IRB at appropriate intervals as designated by the IRB, but not less than annually; and/or
(4) Documentation to support an exemption for the project from the Common Rule (Note: this option is not available for activities that fall under 45 CFR part 46 subpart C).
(e) Additionally, if the Contractor modifies a research protocol, questionnaire, survey, advertisement, or informed consent form approved by the cognizant IRB, the Contractor shall submit a copy of all modified material along with documentation of approval for said modification by the cognizant IRB to the Contracting Officer for institutional review and approval. The Contractor shall not implement any IRB approved modification without written approval by the Contracting Officer.
(f) No work involving human subjects may be undertaken, conducted, or costs incurred and/or charged to the project, until the Contracting Officer approves the required appropriate documentation in writing.
(g) The Contractor shall bear full responsibility for the performance of all work and services involving the use of human subjects under this contract in a proper manner and as safely as is feasible. The parties hereto agree that the Contractor retains the right to control and direct the performance of all work under this contract. Nothing in this contract shall be deemed to constitute the Contractor or any subcontractor, agent or employee of the Contractor, or any other person, organization, institution, or group of any kind whatsoever, as the agency or employee of the Government. The Contractor agrees that it has entered into this contract and will discharge its obligations, duties, and undertakings and the work pursuant thereto, whether requiring professional judgement or otherwise, as an independent Contractor without imputing liability on the part of the Government for the acts of the Contractor or its employees.
(h) If at any time during performance of this contract, the Contracting Officer determines, in consultation with the Office for Protection from Research Risks (OPRR), National Institutes of Health (NIH), that the Contractor is not in compliance with any of the requirements, the Contracting Officer may immediately suspend the research and further payments under this contract until the Contractor corrects such noncompliance. Notice of the suspension may be communicated by telephone and confirmed in writing. If the Contractor fails to complete the corrective action within the period of time designated in the Contracting Officer’s written notice of suspension, the Contracting Officer may, in consultation with OPRR, NIH, terminate this contract and the Contractor’s name may be removed from the list of those Contractors with approved Department of Health and Human Services Human Subject Assurances.
(End of clause)
852.235-72  Animal Welfare.
As prescribed at
835.003-73
, insert the following clause:
ANIMAL WELFARE (DEC 2022)
(a) The Contractor shall—
(1) Use the Veterans Affairs (VA), Office of Research Oversight (ORO) Laboratory Animal Welfare Checklist;
(2) Comply with the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Animal Welfare Act and Animal Welfare Regulations at
https://www.aphis.usda.gov/animal_welfare
, and the Animal Welfare Information Center’s (AWIC) information for improved animal care and use in research, testing, and teaching provided at
https://www.nal.usda.gov/awic
;
(3) Develop and provide to the Contracting Officer a written plan of providing adequate veterinary care to laboratory animals, including—
(i) The frequency of visits; and
(ii) Provisions for after-hours, weekend and holiday veterinary coverage.
(b) The Contracting Officer may immediately suspend the work by issuance of a stop work order and suspend further payments under this contract for failure to comply with the requirements of this clause.
(c) The suspension will stay in effect until the Contractor complies with the requirements. Failure to complete corrective action within the time specified by the Contracting Officer may result in termination of this contract.
(d) The Contractor shall include the substance of this clause, in all subcontracts involving research and development, testing, evaluation or training that use live vertebrate animals.
(End of clause)
852.235-73  Facilities.
As prescribed at
835.003-74
, insert the following clause:
FACILITIES (DEC 2022)
(a) The facilities specified in the contract are considered essential to the work being performed under this contract. Therefore, prior to removing, replacing, or diverting any of the listed or specified facilities, the Contractor shall—
(1) Notify the Contracting Officer in writing; and
(2) Submit justification (including proposed substitutions) in sufficient detail to permit evaluation of the potential impact on this contract.
(b) The Contractor shall make no removal, replacement or diversion of facilities without the Contracting Officer’s written consent.
(End of clause)
852.235-74  Acknowledgement of Support and Disclaimer.
As prescribed at
835.003-75
, insert the following clause:
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF SUPPORT AND DISCLAIMER (DEC 2022)
(a) The Contractor shall include an acknowledgment of the Government's support in the publication of any material based on or developed under this contract, stated in the following terms: This material is based upon work supported by the (name of contracting agency) under this VA contract.
(b) All material, except scientific articles or papers published in scientific journals, must, in addition to any notices or disclaimers by the Contractor, also contain the following disclaimer:
Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the VA.
(End of clause)
852.235-75  Scientific and Technical Reports.
As prescribed at
835.010
, insert the following clause:
SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL REPORTS (DEC 2022)
The Contractor shall submit an electronic copy of the approved scientific technical reports, not a summary, delivered under this contract to the National Technical Information Service (NTIS) as delineated at
FAR 35.010
.
852.236-70  [Reserved]
852.236-71  Specifications and Drawings for Construction.
As prescribed in
836.521
, insert the following clause:
SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS FOR CONSTRUCTION (APR 2019)
The clause entitled “Specifications and Drawings for Construction” in
FAR 52.236-21
is supplemented as follows:
(a) The Contracting Officer’s interpretation of the drawings and specifications will be final, subject to the disputes clause.
(b) The Contractor shall—
(1) Check all drawings and specifications furnished immediately upon receipt;
(2) Compare all drawings and the specifications, and verify the figures before laying out the work;
(3) Promptly notify the Contracting Officer of any discrepancies;
(4) Be responsible for any errors that might have been avoided by complying with this paragraph (b); and
(5) Reproduce and print contract drawings and specifications as needed.
(c)In general—
(1)Drawings of greater detail shall govern over drawings of lesser detail unless specifically noted otherwise; and
(2)Figures and numerical quantities noted on drawings govern over scale measurements.
(d) Omissions from the drawings or specifications or the misdescription of details of work that are manifestly necessary to carry out the intent of the drawings and specifications, or that are customarily performed, shall not relieve the Contractor from performing such omitted or misdescribed details of the work. The Contractor shall perform such details as if fully and correctly set forth and described in the drawings and specifications.
(e) The work shall conform to the specifications and the contract drawings identified on the following index of drawings:
Title
File
Drawing No.
(End of clause)
852.236-72  Performance of Work by the Contractor.
As prescribed in
836.501
, insert the following clause:
PERFORMANCE OF WORK BY THE CONTRACTOR (APR 2019)
(a) In accordance with FAR
52.236-1
, the contract work accomplished on the site by laborers, mechanics, and foremen/forewomen on the Contractor’s payroll and under their direct supervision shall be used in establishing the percent of work to be performed by the Contractor.  Cost of material and equipment installed by such labor may be included.  The work by the Contractor’s executive, administrative and clerical forces shall be excluded in establishing compliance with the requirements of this clause.
(b) The Contractor shall submit, simultaneously with the schedule of costs required by the Payments under Fixed-Price Construction Contracts clause of the contract, a statement designating the portions of contract work to be performed with the Contractor’s own forces.  The approved schedule of costs will be used in determining the value of a work activity/event, or portions thereof, of the work for the purpose of this article.
(c) Changes to established activity/event identifiers or responsibility codes for Contractor activities shall not be made without approval from the Contracting Officer.
(d) In the event the Contractor fails to comply with FAR
52.236-1
, Performance of Work by the Contractor, the Contracting Officer will withhold retention in the amount of 15% of the value of any work activity/element being invoiced that was not authorized by the Contracting Officer to be performed by someone other than the prime Contractor’s own workforce.
(End of clause)
Alternate I (APR 2019).  For requirements which include a Network Analysis System (NAS), substitute the following paragraphs
(b)
for paragraphs
(b)
of the basic clause:
(b) The Contractor shall submit, simultaneously with the cost per activity of the construction schedule required by Section 01310 or 01311, NETWORK ANALYSIS SYSTEM, a responsibility code for all activities of the network for which the Contractor’s forces will perform the work.The cost of these activities will be used in determining the portions of the total contract work to be executed by the Contractor’s forces for the purpose of this article.
852.236-73 through 852.236-78  [Reserved]
852.236-79  Contractor Production Report.
As prescribed in
836.573
, insert the following clause:
CONTRACTOR PRODUCTION REPORT (APR 2019)
(a) The Contractor shall furnish to the resident engineer, for each workday, a consolidated report for the preceding workday. Reporting shall begin from date of contractor mobilization until the date of final acceptance except for authorized holidays. VA Form 10101, Contractor Production Report, or a Contractor generated form containing the same type of information shall be signed, dated and submitted by the Contractor superintendent.
(b) Each report shall include and specifically identify at least one safety topic germane to the jobsite that day.
(End of clause)
852.236-80  Subcontracts and Work Coordination.
As prescribed in
836.574
, insert the following clause:
SUBCONTRACTS AND WORK COORDINATION (APR 2019)
(a) Nothing contained in this contract shall be construed as creating any contractual relationship between any subcontractor and the Government.  Divisions or sections of specifications are not intended to control the Contractor in dividing work among subcontractors, or to limit work performed by any trade.
(b) The Contractor shall be responsible to the Government for acts and omissions of his/her own employees, and of the subcontractors and their employees.  The Contractor shall also be responsible for coordination of the work of the trades, subcontractors, and material suppliers.
(c) The Government or its representatives will not undertake to settle any differences between the Contractor and subcontractors or between subcontractors.
(d) The Government reserves the right to refuse to permit employment on the work, or require dismissal from the work, of any subcontractor or subcontractor employee who, by reason of previous unsatisfactory work on Department of Veterans Affairs projects or for any other reason, is considered by the Contracting Officer to be incompetent, careless, or otherwise objectionable.
(End of clause)
Alternate I (APR 2019).  For new construction work with complex mechanical-electrical work, the following paragraph relating to work coordination may be substituted for paragraph
(b)
of the basic clause:
(b) The Contractor shall be responsible to the Government for acts and omissions of his/her own employees, and subcontractors and their employees.  The Contractor shall also be responsible for coordination of the work of the trades, subcontractors, and material suppliers.  The Contractor shall, in advance of the work, prepare coordination drawings showing the location of openings through slabs, the pipe sleeves and hanger inserts, as well as the location and elevation of utility lines, including, but not limited to, conveyor systems, pneumatic tubes, ducts, and conduits and pipes 2 inches and larger in diameter.  These drawings, including plans, elevations, and sections as appropriate, shall clearly show the manner in which the utilities fit into the available space and relate to each other and to existing building elements.  Drawings shall be of appropriate scale to satisfy the previously stated purposes, but not smaller than 3/8-inch scale.  Drawings may be composite (with distinctive colors for the various trades) or may be separate but fully coordinated drawings (such as sepias or photographic paper reproducibles) of the same scale.  Separate drawings shall depict identical building areas or sections and shall be capable of being overlaid in any combination.  The submitted drawings for a given area of the project shall show the work of all trades that will be involved in that particular area.  Six complete composite drawings or six complete sets of separate reproducible drawings shall be received by the Government not less than 20 days prior to the scheduled start of the work in the area illustrated by the drawings, for the purpose of showing the Contractor’s planned methods of installation.  The objectives of such drawings are to promote carefully planned work sequence and proper trade coordination, in order to assure the expeditious solutions of problems and the installation of lines and equipment as contemplated by the contract documents while avoiding or minimizing additional costs to the Contractor and to the Government.  In the event the Contractor, in coordinating the various installations and in planning the method of installation, finds a conflict in location or elevation of any of the utilities with themselves, with structural items or with other construction items, he/she shall bring this conflict to the attention of the Contracting Officer immediately.  In doing so, the Contractor shall explain the proposed method of solving the problem or shall request instructions as to how to proceed if adjustments beyond those of usual trades’ coordination are necessary.  Utilities installation work will not proceed in any area prior to the submission and completion of the Government review of the coordinated drawings for that area, nor in any area in which conflicts are disclosed by the coordination drawings, until the conflicts have been corrected to the satisfaction of the Contracting Officer.  It is the responsibility of the Contractor to submit the required drawings in a timely manner consistent with the requirements to complete the work covered by this contract within the prescribed contract time.
852.236-81 through 852.236-89  [Reserved]
852.236-90  Restriction on Submission and Use of Equal Products.
As prescribed in
836.202-70
, insert the following clause in solicitations and contracts when it is determined that only one product will meet the Government’s minimum needs and submission of “equal” products is not permitted:
RESTRICTION ON SUBMISSION AND USE OF EQUAL PRODUCTS (APR 2019)
The clause applies to the following items: [
Contracting Officer fill-in
]
_________________________
_________________________
_________________________
Notwithstanding the “Material and Workmanship” clause of this contract, FAR
52.236-5(a)
, nor any other clause or provision, only brand name products for the items listed above will be authorized for use on this contract.
(End of clause)
852.236-91  [Reserved]
852.236-92  Notice to Bidders–Additive or Deductive Bid Line Items.
As prescribed in
836.580
, insert the following provision:
NOTICE TO BIDDERS–ADDITIVE OR DEDUCTIVE BID LINE ITEMS (APR 2019)
(a) Additive or deductive line items in the bid schedule shall be evaluated to determine the low offeror and the items to be awarded. The evaluation shall be made as follows—
(1) Prior to the opening of bids, the Government will determine the amount of funds available for the project.
(2) The low bid shall be the Bidder that—
(i) Is otherwise eligible for award; and
(ii) Offers the lowest aggregate amount for the first or base line item, plus or minus (in the order stated in the list of priorities in the bid schedule) those additive or deductive line items that provide the most features within the funds determined available.
(3) All bids shall be evaluated on the basis of the same additive or deductive line items.
(i) If adding another item from the bid schedule list of priorities would make the award exceed the available funds for all offerors, the Contracting Officer will skip that item and go to the next item from the bid schedule of priorities; and
(ii) Add that next item if an award may be made that includes that line item and is within the available funds.
(b) The Contracting Officer will use the list of priorities in the bid schedule only to determine the low offeror. After determining the low offeror, an award may be made on any combination of items if—
(1) It is in the best interest of the Government;
(2) Funds are available at the time of award; and
(3) The low offeror’s price for the combination to be awarded is less than the price offered by any other responsive, responsible offeror.
(c) Example: “The amount available is $100,000. Offeror A’s base bid and four additives (in the order stated in the list of priorities in the bid schedule) are $85,000, $10,000, $8,000, $6,000, and $4,000. Offeror B’s base bid and four additives are $80,000, $16,000, $9,000, $7,000, and $4,000. Offeror A is the low offeror. The aggregate amount of offeror A’s bid for purposes of award would be $99,000, which includes a base bid plus the first and fourth additives. The second and third additives were skipped because each of them would cause the aggregate bid to exceed $100,000.“
(End of provision)
852.237-70  Indemnification and Medical Liability Insurance.
As prescribed in
837.403-70(a)
, insert the following clause:
INDEMNIFICATION AND MEDICAL LIABILITY INSURANCE (OCT 2019)
(a) It is expressly agreed and understood that this is a non-personal services contract, as defined in
Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) 37.101
, under which the professional services rendered by the Contractor or its health-care providers are rendered in its capacity as an independent contractor.  The Government may evaluate the quality of professional and administrative services provided but retains no control over professional aspects of the services rendered, including by example, the Contractor’s or its health-care providers’ professional medical judgment, diagnosis, or specific medical treatments.  The Contractor and its health-care providers shall be liable for their liability-producing acts or omissions.  The Contractor shall maintain or require all health-care providers performing under this contract to maintain, during the term of this contract, professional liability insurance issued by a responsible insurance carrier of not less than the following amount(s) per specialty per occurrence: [
Contracting Officer’s Note: Insert the dollar amount value(s) of standard coverage(s) prevailing within the local community as to the specific medical specialty, or specialties, concerned, or such higher amount as the Contracting Officer deems necessary to protect the Government's interests.
]  However, if the Contractor is an entity or a subdivision of a State that either provides for self-insurance or limits the liability or the amount of insurance purchased by State entities, then the insurance requirement of this contract shall be fulfilled by incorporating the provisions of the applicable State law.
(b) An apparently successful offeror, upon request of the Contracting Officer, shall, prior to contract award, furnish evidence of the insurability of the offeror and/or of all health-care providers who will perform under this contract.  The submission shall provide evidence of insurability concerning the medical liability insurance required by paragraph
(a)
of this clause or the provisions of State law as to self-insurance, or limitations on liability or insurance.
(c) The Contractor shall, prior to commencement of services under the contract, provide to the Contracting Officer Certificates of Insurance or insurance policies evidencing the required insurance coverage and an endorsement stating that any cancellation or material change adversely affecting the Government’s interest shall not be effective until 30 days after the insurer or the Contractor gives written notice to the Contracting Officer.  Certificates or policies shall be provided for the Contractor and/or each health-care provider who will perform under this contract.
(d) The Contractor shall notify the Contracting Officer within 5 days of becoming aware of a change in insurance providers during the performance period of this contract for all health-care providers performing under this contract.  The notification shall provide evidence that the Contractor and/or health-care providers will meet all the requirements of this clause, including those concerning liability insurance and endorsements.  These requirements may be met either under the new policy, or a combination of old and new policies, if applicable.
(e) The Contractor shall insert the substance of this clause, including this paragraph (e), in all subcontracts for health-care services under this contract.  The Contractor shall be responsible for compliance by any subcontractor or lower-tier subcontractor with the provisions set forth in paragraph
(a)
of this clause. At least 5 days before the commencement of work by any subcontractor, the Contractor shall furnish to the Contracting Officer evidence of such insurance.
(End of clause)
852.237-71  Nonsmoking Policy for Children’s Services.
As prescribed in
837.403-70(b)
, insert the following clause:
NONSMOKING POLICY FOR CHILDREN’S SERVICES (OCT 2019)
(a) Smoking in facilities where certain federally funded children’s services are provided shall be prohibited. The Pro-Children Act of 2001 (20 U.S.C. 7181-7183) prohibits smoking within any indoor facility (or portion thereof), whether owned, leased, or contracted for, that is used for the routine or regular provision of health or day care services that are provided to children under the age of 18. The statutory prohibition also applies to indoor facilities that are constructed, operated, or maintained with Federal funds.
(b) By acceptance of this contract or order, the Contractor agrees to comply with the requirements of the Act. The Act also applies to all subcontracts awarded under this contract for the specified children’s services. Accordingly, the Contractor shall ensure that each of its employees, and any subcontractor staff, is made aware of, understands, and complies with the provisions of the Act. Failure to comply with the Act may result in the imposition of a civil monetary penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for each violation and/or the imposition of an administrative compliance order on the responsible entity. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate violation.
(End of clause)
852.237-72  Crime Control Act–Reporting of Child Abuse.
As prescribed in
837.403-70(c)
, insert the following clause:
CRIME CONTROL ACT–REPORTING OF CHILD ABUSE (OCT 2019)
(a) Public Law 101–647, also known as the Crime Control Act of 1990 (Act), imposes responsibilities on certain individuals who, while engaged in a professional capacity or activity, as defined in the Act, on Federal land or in a federally-operated (or contracted) facility, learn of facts that give the individual reason to suspect that a child has suffered an incident of child abuse.
(b) The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of the Act. The Act also applies to all applicable subcontracts awarded under this contract. Accordingly, the Contractor shall ensure that each of its employees, and any subcontractor staff, is made aware of, understands, and complies with the provisions of the Act.
(End of clause)
852.237-73  Crime Control Act–Requirement for Background Checks.
As prescribed in
837.403-70(d)
, insert the following clause:
CRIME CONTROL ACT–REQUIREMENT FOR BACKGROUND CHECKS (OCT 2019)
(a) Public Law 101–647, also known as the Crime Control Act of 1990 (Act), requires that all individuals involved with the provision of child care services, as defined in the Act, to children under the age of 18 undergo a criminal background check.
(b) The Contracting Officer will provide the necessary information to the Contractor regarding the process for obtaining the background check. The Contractor may hire a staff person provisionally prior to the completion of a background check, if at all times prior to the receipt of the background check during which children are in the care of the newly-hired person, the person is within the sight and under the supervision of a previously investigated staff person.
(c) The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of the Act. The Act also applies to all applicable subcontracts awarded under the contract. Accordingly, the Contractor shall ensure that each of its employees, and any subcontractor staff, is made aware of, understands, and complies with the provisions of the Act.
(End of clause)
852.237-74  Non-Discrimination in Service Delivery.
As prescribed in
837.110-70(a)
, insert the following clause:
NON-DISCRIMINATION IN SERVICE DELIVERY (OCT 2019)
It is the policy of the Department of Veterans Affairs that no person otherwise eligible will be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or subjected to discrimination in the administration of VA programs and services based on non-merit factors such as race, color, national origin, religion, or disability (physical or mental). By acceptance of this contract, the Contractor agrees to comply with this policy in supporting the program and in performing the services called for under this contract. The Contractor shall include this clause in all subcontracts awarded under this contract for supporting or performing the specified program and services. Accordingly, the Contractor shall ensure that each of its employees, and any subcontractor staff, is made aware of, understands, and complies with this policy.
(End of clause)
852.237-75  Key Personnel.
As prescribed in
837.110-70(b)
, insert the following clause:
KEY PERSONNEL (OCT 2019)
The key personnel specified in this contract are considered to be essential to work performance. At least 30 days prior to the Contractor voluntarily diverting any of the specified individuals to other programs or contracts the Contractor shall notify the Contracting Officer and shall submit a justification for the diversion or replacement and a request to replace the individual. The request must identify the proposed replacement and provide an explanation of how the replacement’s skills, experience, and credentials meet or exceed the requirements of the contract. If the employee of the Contractor is terminated for cause or separates from the contractor voluntarily with less than thirty days notice, the Contractor shall provide the maximum notice practicable under the circumstances. The Contractor shall not divert, replace, or announce any such change to key personnel without the written consent of the Contracting Officer. The contract will be modified to add or delete key personnel as necessary to reflect the agreement of the parties.
(End of clause)
852.237-76  Award to Single Offeror.
As prescribed in
837.7001(a)(1)
, insert the following provision:
AWARD TO SINGLE OFFEROR (OCT 2019)
(a) Award shall be made to a single offeror.
(b) Offerors shall include unit prices for each item. Failure to include unit prices for each item will be cause for rejection of the entire offer.
(c) The Government will evaluate offers on the basis of the estimated quantities shown.
(d) Award will be made to that responsive, responsible offeror whose total aggregate offer is the lowest price to the Government.
(End of provision)
Alternate I
(OCT 2019). As prescribed in
837.7001(a)(2)
, insert the following paragraph (d) in lieu of paragraph (d) of the basic provision:
(d) Award will be made to that responsive, responsible offeror whose total aggregate offer is in the best interest of the Government.
852.237-77  Area of Performance.
As prescribed in
837.7001(b)(1)
, insert the following clause:
AREA OF PERFORMANCE (OCT 2019)
(a) The area of performance is as specified in the contract.
(b) The Contractor shall take possession of the remains at the place where they are located, transport them to the Contractor'’s place of preparation, and later transport them to a place designated by the Contracting Officer.
(c) The Contractor will not be reimbursed for transportation when both the place where the remains were located and the delivery point are within the area of performance.
(d) If remains are located outside the area of performance, the Contracting Officer may place an order with the Contractor under this contract or may obtain the services elsewhere. If the Contracting Officer requires the Contractor to transport the remains into the area of performance, the Contractor shall be paid the amount per mile in the schedule for the number of miles required to transport the remains by a reasonable route from the point where located to the boundary of the area of performance.
(e) The Contracting Officer may require the Contractor to deliver remains to any point within 100 miles of the area of performance. In this case, the Contractor shall be paid the amount per mile in the schedule for the number of miles required to transport the remains by a reasonable route from the boundary of the area of performance to the delivery point.
(End of clause)
852.237-78  Performance and Delivery.
As prescribed in
837.7001(b)(2)
, insert the following clause:
PERFORMANCE AND DELIVERY (OCT 2019)
(a) The Contractor shall furnish the material ordered and perform the services specified as promptly as possible, but not later than 36 hours after receiving notification to remove the remains, excluding the time necessary for the Government to inspect and check results of preparation.
(b) The Government may, at no additional charge, require the Contractor to hold the remains for an additional period not to exceed 72 hours from the time the remains are casketed and final inspection is completed.
(End of clause)
852.237-79  Subcontracting.
As prescribed in
837.7001(b)(3)
, insert the following clause:
SUBCONTRACTING (OCT 2019)
The Contractor shall not subcontract any work under this contract without the Contracting Officer’s written approval. This clause does not apply to contracts of employment between the Contractor and its personnel.
(End of clause)
852.237-80  Health Department and Transport Permits.
As prescribed in
837.7001(b)(4)
, insert the following clause:
HEALTH DEPARTMENT AND TRANSPORT PERMITS (OCT 2019)
The Contractor shall meet all State and local licensing requirements and obtain and furnish all necessary health department and shipping permits at no additional cost to the Government. The Contractor shall ensure that all necessary health department permits are in order for disposition of the remains.
(End of clause)
852.239-70  Security Requirements for Information Technology Resources.
As prescribed in
839.106-70(a)
, insert the following clause:
SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESOURCES (FEB 2023)
(a)
Definitions
. As used in this clause—
Information technology
has the same meaning in
FAR 2.101
and also
means
Information and Communication Technology (ICT).
Information system security plan
means a formal document that provides an overview of the security requirements for an information system and describes the security controls in place or planned for meeting those requirements.
(b)
Responsibilities
. The Contractor shall be responsible for information system security for all systems connected to a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) network or operated by the Contractor for VA, regardless of location. This clause is applicable to all or any part of the contract that includes information technology resources or services in which the Contractor has physical or other system access to VA information that directly supports the mission of VA.Examples of tasks that require security provisions include—
(1) Hosting of VA e-Government sites or other information technology operations;
(2) Acquisition, transmission, or analysis of data owned by VA with significant replacement cost should the contractor's copy be corrupted; and
(3) Access to VA general support systems/major applications at a level beyond that granted the general public, e.g., bypassing a firewall.
(c)
Information system security plan
. The Contractor shall develop, provide, implement, and maintain an Information System Security Plan. VA information systems must have an information system security plan that provides an overview of the security requirements for the system and describes the security controls in place or the plan for meeting those requirements. This plan shall describe the processes and procedures that the Contractor will follow to ensure appropriate security of information system resources developed, processed, or used under this contract. The information system security plan should include implementation status, responsible entities, resources, and estimated completion dates. Information system security plans may also include, but are not limited to, a compiled list of system characteristics, and key security-related documents such as a risk assessment, PIA, system interconnection agreements, contingency plan, security configurations, configuration management plan, and incident response plan. The plan shall address the specific contract requirements regarding information systems related support or services included in the contract, to include the performance work statement (PWS) or statement of work (SOW). The Contractor's Information System Security Plan shall comply with applicable Federal Laws that include, but are not limited to,
40 U.S.C. 11331
, the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014 and the E-Government Act of 2002. The plan shall meet information system security requirements in accordance with Federal and VA policies and procedures, and as amended during the term of this contract, and include, but are not limited to the following.
(1) OMB Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource;
(2) National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Guidelines; and
(3)
VA Directive 6500
, VA Cybersecurity Program, and the directives and handbooks in the VA 6500 series related to VA information (including VA sensitive information and sensitive personal information and information systems security and privacy), as well as those set forth in the contract specifications, statement of work, or performance work statement. These include, but are not limited to,
VA Handbook 6500.6
, Contract Security; and VA
Directive
and
Handbook
0710, Personnel Security and Suitability Program, which establishes VA’s procedures, responsibilities, and processes for complying with current Federal law, Executive Orders, policies, regulations, standards and guidance for protecting VA information, information systems (see
802.101
, Definitions) security and privacy, and adhering to personnel security requirements when accessing VA information or information systems.
(d)
Submittal of plan
. Within 90 days after contract award, the Contractor shall submit the Information System Security Plan to the Contracting Officer for review and approval.
(e)
Security accreditation
. As required by current VA policy, the Contractor shall submit written proof of information system security accreditation to the Contracting Officer for non-VA owned systems. Such written proof may be furnished either by the Contractor or by a third party. Accreditation shall be in accordance with VA policy available from the Contracting Officer upon request. The Contractor shall submit for acceptance by the Contracting Officer along with this accreditation a final information system security plan, such as a risk assessment, security test and evaluation, and disaster recovery plan/continuity of operations plan. The accreditation and the final information system security plan and the accompanying documents, such as a risk assessment, security test and evaluation, and disaster recovery/continuity of operations plan.
(f)
Annual validation
. On an annual basis, the Contractor shall verify in writing to the Contracting Officer that the Information System Security Plan remains valid.
(g)
Banners
. The Contractor shall ensure that the official VA banners are displayed on all VA systems (both public and private) operated by the Contractor that contain Privacy Act information before allowing anyone access to the system.The Office of Information Technology will make official VA banners available to the Contractor.
(h)
Screening and access
. The Contractor shall screen all personnel requiring privileged access or limited privileged access to systems operated by the Contractor for VA or interconnected to a VA network in accordance with VA Directives and Handbooks referenced in paragraph (c) of this clause.
(i)
Training
. The Contractor shall ensure that its employees performing services under this contract complete VA security awareness training on an annual basis. This includes signing an acknowledgment that they have read, understand, and agree to abide by the VA Information Security Rules of Behavior (VA National Rules of Behavior) as required by
38 U.S.C. 5723
;
FAR 39.105
, Privacy; clause
852.204-71
, Information and Information Systems Security, and this clause on an annual basis.
(j)
Government access
. The Contractor shall provide the Government access to the Contractor's and subcontractors' facilities, installations, operations, documentation, databases, and personnel used in performance of the contract. The Contractor shall provide access to enable a program of information system inspection (to include vulnerability testing), investigation and audit (to safeguard against threats and hazards to the integrity, availability and confidentiality of VA data or to the function of information systems operated on behalf of VA), and to preserve evidence of computer crime.
(k)
Notification of termination of employees
. The Contractor shall immediately notify the Contracting Officer when an employee who has access to VA information systems or data terminates employment.
(l)
Subcontractor flow down requirement
. The Contractor shall incorporate and flow down the substance of this clause to all subcontracts that meet the conditions in paragraph (a) of this clause.
(End of clause)
852.239-71  Information System Security Plan and Accreditation.
As prescribed in
839.106-70(a)
, insert the following provision:
INFORMATION SYSTEM SECURITY PLAN AND ACCREDITATION (FEB 2023)
All offers submitted in response to this solicitation or request for quotation shall address the approach for completing the security plan and accreditation requirements in clause
852.239-70
, Security Requirements for Information Technology Resources.
(End of provision)
852.239-72  Information System Design and Development.
As prescribed in
839.106-70(b)
, insert the following clause:
INFORMATION SYSTEM DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT (FEB 2023)
(a) Design or development at non-VA facilities. Information systems that are designed or developed for or on behalf of VA at non-VA facilities shall comply with all VA directives developed in accordance with the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA), Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations, NIST, and related VA security and privacy control requirements for Federal information systems. This includes standards for the protection of electronic protected health information (PHI), outlined in
45 CFR part 164, subpart C
, information and system security categorization level designations in accordance with FIPS 199 and FIPS 200 with implementation of all baseline security controls commensurate with the FIPS 199 system security categorization and the Trusted Internet Connections (TIC) Reference Architecture).
(b) Privacy Impact Assessment. During the development cycle a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) must be completed, provided to the COR, and approved by the VA Privacy Service in accordance with
VA Directive 6508
, Implementation of Privacy Threshold Analysis and Privacy Impact Assessment.
(c) Security of procured or developed systems and technologies. The Contractor shall ensure the security of all procured or developed systems and technologies, including their subcomponents (hereinafter referred to as "Systems"), throughout the life of the contract and any extension, warranty, or maintenance periods. This includes, but is not limited to, workarounds, patches, hotfixes, upgrades, and any physical components (hereafter referred to as Security Fixes) which may be necessary to fix all security vulnerabilities published or known to the Contractor anywhere in the Systems, including Operating Systems and firmware. The Contractor shall ensure that Security Fixes shall not negatively impact the Systems.
(d) Subcontract flow down requirements. The Contractor shall include the clause at
52.224-1
, Privacy Act Notification, in every solicitation and/or subcontract awarded by the Contractor when the clause
52.224-1
is included in its contract.
(End of clause)
852.239-73  Information System Hosting, Operation, Maintenance, or Use.
As prescribed in
839.106-70(c)
, insert the following clause:
INFORMATION SYSTEM HOSTING, OPERATION, MAINTENANCE, OR USE (FEB 2023)
(a)
Definitions
. As used in this clause—
Assessment and Authorization (A&A)
means the process used to ensure information systems including Major Applications and General Support Systems have effective security safeguards which have been implemented, planned for, and documented in an Information Technology Security Plan. The A&A process per applicable VA policies and procedures is the mechanism by which VA provides an Authorization to Operate (ATO), the official management decision given by the VA to authorize operation of an information system (see
VA Handbook 6500
for additional details).
Information system security plan
means a formal document that provides an overview of the security requirements for an information system and describes the security controls in place or planned for meeting those requirements.
(b)
Hosting, operation, maintenance, or use at non-VA facilities
. For information systems that are hosted, operated, maintained, or used on behalf of VA at non-VA facilities, Contractors/subcontractors are fully responsible and accountable for ensuring compliance with the applicable Health Insurance Portability and Accountability (HIPAA) Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy and Security Rules, the Privacy Act and other required VA confidentiality statutes included in VA’s mandatory yearly training and privacy handbooks, Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA), National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS), and VA security and privacy directives and handbooks. This includes conducting compliant risk assessments, routine vulnerability scanning, system patching and change management procedures, and the completion of an acceptable contingency plan for each system. The Contractor's security control procedures must be equivalent to or exceed, those procedures used to secure VA systems. A Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) must also be provided to the COR and approved by VA Privacy Service prior to approval to operate. All external Internet connections to VA's network involving VA information must be in accordance with the Trusted Internet Connections (TIC) Reference Architecture and reviewed and approved by VA prior to implementation. For Cloud Services hosting, the Contractor shall also ensure compliance with the Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP).
(c)
Collecting, processing, transmitting, and storing of VA sensitive information
. Adequate security controls for collecting, processing, transmitting, and storing of VA sensitive information, must be in place, tested, and approved by VA prior to hosting, operation, maintenance, or use of the information system, or systems by or on behalf of VA. These security controls are to be assessed and stated within the Information System Security Plan and if these controls are determined not to be in place, or inadequate, a Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M) must be submitted and approved prior to the collection, processing, transmitting, and storing of VA sensitive information.
(d)
Annual FISMA security controls assessment
. The Contractor/subcontractor's system must adhere to all FISMA, FIPS, and NIST standards related to the annual FISMA security controls assessment and review and update the Privacy Impact Assessment.Any deficiencies noted during this assessment must be provided to the Contracting Officer for entry into VA's POA&M management process. The Contractor/subcontractor must use VA's POA&M process to document planned remedial actions to address any deficiencies in information security policies, procedures, and practices, and the completion of those activities. Security deficiencies must be corrected within the timeframes specified by the VA in the performance work statement (PWS) or statement of work (SOW), or in the approved remediation plan through the VA POA&M process. Contractor/subcontractor procedures are subject to periodic, unannounced assessments by VA officials, including the VA Office of Inspector General. The physical security aspects associated with Contractor/subcontractor activities must also be subject to such assessments. The results of an annual review or a major change in the cybersecurity posture at any time may indicate the need for reassessment and reauthorization of the system. If major changes to the system occur that may affect the privacy or security of the data or the system, the A&A of the system may need to be reviewed, retested and re-authorized per
VA Directive 6500
. This may require reviewing and updating all of the documentation as described in
VA Handbook 6500.6
(e.g., System Security Plan, Contingency Plan). See
VA Handbook 6500.6
for a list of documentation. The VA Information System Risk Management (ISRM) office can provide guidance on whether a new A&A would be necessary.
(e)
Annual self-assessment
. The Contractor/subcontractor must conduct an annual self-assessment on all systems and outsourced services as required. Both hard copy and electronic copies of the assessment must be provided to the COR. VA reserves the right to conduct such an assessment using government personnel or another Contractor/subcontractor. The Contractor/subcontractor must take appropriate and timely action, as may be specifically addressed in the contract, to correct or mitigate any weaknesses discovered during such testing, at no additional cost to the Government to correct Contractor/subcontractor systems and outsourced services.
(f)
Prohibition of installation and use of personally-owned or Contractor-owned equipment or software on VA networks
. VA prohibits the installation and use of personally-owned or Contractor/subcontractor-owned equipment or software on VA networks. If non-VA owned equipment must be used to fulfill the requirements of a contract, it must be stated in the service agreement, PWS, SOW or contract. All of the security controls required for government furnished equipment (GFE) must also be utilized in approved other equipment (OE) at the Contractor’s expense. All remote systems must be equipped with, and use, a VA-approved antivirus (AV) software and a personal (host-based or enclave based) firewall that is configured with a VA-approved configuration. Software must be kept current, including all critical updates and patches. Owners of approved OE are responsible for providing and maintaining the anti-viral software and the firewall on the non-VA owned OE.
(g)
Disposal or return of electronic storage media on non-VA leased or non-VA owned IT equipment
. All electronic storage media used on non-VA leased or non-VA owned IT equipment that is used to store, process, or access VA information must be handled in adherence with NIST 800-88, Rev. 1, “Guidelines for Media Sanitization,” and
VA Directive 6500
, VA Cybersecurity Program, paragraph 2(b)(5), Media Sanitization including upon—
(1)Completion or termination of the contract; or
(2) Disposal or return of the IT equipment by the Contractor/subcontractor or any person acting on behalf of the Contractor/subcontractor, whichever is earlier. Media (e.g., hard drives, optical disks, CDs, back-up tapes) used by the Contractors/ subcontractors that contain VA information must be returned to the VA for sanitization or destruction or the Contractor/subcontractor must self-certify that the media has been disposed of per
VA Handbook 6500.10
requirements. This must be completed within 30 days of termination of the contract.
(h) Bio-Medical devices and other equipment or systems. Bio-Medical devices and other equipment or systems containing media (e.g., hard drives, optical disks) with VA sensitive information will not be returned to the Contractor at the end of lease, for trade-in, or other purposes. For purposes of these devices and protection of VA sensitive information the devices may be provided back to the Contractor under one of three scenarios—
(1) The Contractor must accept the system without the drive;
(2) A spare drive must be installed in place of the original drive at time of turn-in if VA's initial medical device purchase included a spare drive; or
(3) The Contractor may request reimbursement for the drive at a reasonable open market replacement cost to be separately negotiated by the Contracting Officer and the Contractor at time of contract closeout.
(End of clause)
852.239-74  Security Controls Compliance Testing.
As prescribed in
839.106-70(d)
, insert the following clause:
SECURITY CONTROLS COMPLIANCE TESTING (FEB 2023)
On a periodic basis, VA, including the Office of Inspector General, reserves the right to evaluate any or all of the security and privacy controls implemented by the Contractor under the clauses contained within the contract. With 10 working-days’ notice, at the request of the government, the Contractor must fully cooperate and assist in a government-sponsored security controls assessment at each location wherein VA information is processed or stored, or information systems are developed, operated, maintained, or used on behalf of VA, including those initiated by the Office of Inspector General. The government may conduct a security control assessment on shorter notice, to include unannounced assessments, as determined by VA in the event of a security incident or at any other time.
(End of clause)
852.239-75  Information and Communication Technology Accessibility Notice.
As prescribed in
839.203-70(a)
, insert the following provision:
INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY ACCESSIBILITY NOTICE (FEB 2023)
(a) Any offeror responding to this solicitation must comply with established VA Information and Communication Technology (ICT) (formerly Electronic and Information (EIT)) accessibility standards. Information about Section 508 is available at
http://www.section508.va.gov/
.
(b) The Section 508 accessibility standards applicable to this solicitation are stated in the clause at
852.239-76
, Information and Communication Technology Accessibility. In order to facilitate the Government’s determination whether proposed ICT supplies meet applicable Section 508 accessibility standards, offerors must submit appropriate VA Section 508 Checklists, in accordance with the checklist completion instructions. The purpose of the checklists is to assist VA acquisition and program officials in determining whether proposed ICT supplies, or information, documentation and services conform to applicable Section 508 accessibility standards. The checklists allow offerors or developers to self-evaluate their supplies and document—in detail—whether they conform to a specific Section 508 accessibility standard, and any underway remediation efforts addressing conformance issues.
(c) Respondents to this solicitation must identify any exception to Section 508 requirements. If an offeror claims its supplies or services meet applicable Section 508 accessibility standards, and it is later determined by the Government, i.e., after award of a contract or order, that supplies or services delivered do not conform to the described accessibility standards, remediation of the supplies or services to the level of conformance specified in the contract will be the responsibility of the Contractor at its expense.
(End of provision)
852.239-76  Information and Communication Technology Accessibility.
As prescribed in
839.203-70(b)
, insert the following clause:
INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY ACCESSIBILITY (FEB 2023)
(a) All information and communication technology (ICT) (formerly referred to as electronic and information technology (EIT)) supplies, information, documentation and services support developed, acquired, maintained or delivered under this contract or order must comply with the ‘‘Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board Electronic and Information Technology (EIT) Accessibility Standards’’ (see 36 CFR part 1194). Information about Section 508 is available at
http://www.section508.va.gov/
.
(b) The Section 508 accessibility standards applicable to this contract or order are identified in the specification, statement of work, or performance work statement. If it is determined by the Government that ICT supplies and services provided by the Contractor do not conform to the described accessibility standards in the contract, remediation of the supplies or services to the level of conformance specified in the contract will be the responsibility of the Contractor at its own expense.
(c) The Section 508 accessibility standards applicable to this contract are: ________ [
Contracting Officer: insert the applicable Section 508 accessibility standards
].
(d) In the event of a modification(s) to this contract or order, which adds new EIT supplies or services or revises the type of, or specifications for, supplies or services, the Contracting Officer may require that the Contractor submit a completed VA Section 508 Checklist and any other additional information necessary to assist the Government in determining that the ICT supplies or services conform to Section 508 accessibility standards. If it is determined by the Government that ICT supplies and services provided by the Contractor do not conform to the described accessibility standards in the contract, remediation of the supplies or services to the level of conformance specified in the contract will be the responsibility of the Contractor at its own expense.
(e) If this is an Indefinite-Delivery type contract, a Blanket Purchase Agreement or a Basic Ordering Agreement, the task/delivery order requests that include ICT supplies or services will define the specifications and accessibility standards for the order. In those cases, the Contractor may be required to provide a completed VA Section 508 Checklist and any other additional information necessary to assist the Government in determining that the ICT supplies or services conform to Section 508 accessibility standards. If it is determined by the Government that ICT supplies and services provided by the Contractor do not conform to the described accessibility standards in the provided documentation, remediation of the supplies or services to the level of conformance specified in the contract will be the responsibility of the Contractor at its own expense.
(End of clause)
852.241-70  Disputes—Utility Contracts.
As prescribed in
841.501-70
, insert the following clause:
DISPUTES—UTILITY CONTRACTS (SEP 2020)
(a)
Definition.
As used in this clause, Independent regulatory body means the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, a state-wide agency, or an agency with less than state-wide jurisdiction when operating pursuant to state authority.The body has the power to fix, establish, or control the rates and services of utility suppliers.
(b)
Independent Regulatory Body determinations.
The requirements of the Disputes clause at
FAR 52.233-1
are supplemented to provide that matters involving the interpretation of tariffed retail rates, tariff rate schedules, and tariffed terms provided under this contract are subject to any determinations by the independent regulatory body having jurisdiction.
(End of clause)
852.242-70  Government Construction Contract Administration.
As prescribed in
842.272
, insert the following clause. This is a fill-in clause.
GOVERNMENT CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION (OCT 2020)
(a) Contract administration functions set forth in FAR
FAR 42.302
are hereby delegated to:
[Insert name and office address of Contracting Officer]
Note: If any of the functions set forth in FAR 42.302 are to be retained by the Contracting Officer, identify those as well with the notation: “With the exception of the following contract administration functions: _____________.”
[Delete this notation if not required.]
(b) The following functions will be retained by the Contracting Officer or Administrative Contracting Officer (ACO) and are not redelegable to Resident Engineers:
(1) Award of contract modifications either through supplemental agreements or change orders that exceed the ACO’s appointed warrant limitations.
(2) Issuance of default letters.
(3) Issuance of Cure or Show-Cause Notices.
(4) Suspension of work letters and/or modifications.
(5) Issuance of Contracting Officer final determination letters.
(6) Issuance of termination notices.
(7) Authorization of final payment.
(c) The work will be under the direction of a Department of Veterans Affairs Contracting Officer, who may designate another VA employee to act as resident engineer at the construction site who possesses limited warranted authority.
(d) Except as provided below, the resident engineer’s directions will not conflict with or change contract requirements. Within the limits of any specific authority delegated by the Contracting Officer, the resident engineer may, by written direction, make changes in the work. The Contractor shall be advised of the extent of such authority prior to execution of any work under the contract.
(e) The Contracting Officer or an Administrative Contracting Officer identified in paragraph (a) may further delegate limited authority and specialized support services responsibilities below to the following warranted Resident Engineer personnel on site, not to exceed the dollar value and threshold of their warrant:
[Insert name and office address of Resident Engineer with limited authority]
(1) Conduct post-award orientation conferences.
(2) Issue administrative changes (see
FAR 43.101
) correcting errors or omissions in typing, contractor address, facility or activity code, remittance address, computations which do not required additional contract funds, and other such changes.
(3) For actions not to exceed $
[Insert dollar amount]
negotiate and execute supplemental agreements resulting from change orders issued under the Changes clause.
(4) Negotiate and execute supplemental agreements changing contract delivery schedules where the time extension does not exceed
[Insert number]
calendar days.
(End of clause)
852.242-71  Administrative Contracting Officer.
As prescribed in
842.271
, insert the following clause:
ADMINISTRATIVE CONTRACTING OFFICER (OCT 2020)
The Contracting Officer reserves the right to designate an Administrative Contracting Officer (ACO) for the purpose of performing certain tasks/duties in the administration of the contract. Such designation will be in writing through an ACO Letter of Delegation and will identify the responsibilities and limitations of the ACO. A copy of the ACO Letter of Delegation shall be furnished to the Contractor.
(End of clause)
852.243-70  Construction Contract Changes—Supplement.
As prescribed in
843.205-70
, the Contracting Officer shall insert this clause in solicitations and contracts for construction that are expected to exceed the micro-purchase threshold. The Contracting Officer shall fill in the number of days in which a Contractor must assert its right to an equitable adjustment; however, such amount shall not exceed 60 calendar days.
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT CHANGES—SUPPLEMENT (SEP 2019)
The FAR clauses
52.243-4
, Changes;
52.243-5
, Changes and Changed Conditions; and
52.236-2
, Differing Site Conditions, are supplemented as follows:
(a) Submission of request for equitable adjustment proposals. When directed by the Contracting Officer or requested by the Contractor, the Contractor shall, in accordance with
FAR 15.403-5
, submit proposals for changes in the work exceeding $500,000 in writing to the Contracting Officer or Administrative Contracting Officer (ACO), and to the resident engineer.
(1) The Contractor must provide an itemized breakdown for changes exceeding the micro-purchase threshold (see
FAR 2.101
).
(2) The itemized breakdown shall include materials, quantities, unit prices, labor costs (separated into trades), construction equipment, etc. Labor costs shall be identified with specific material placed or operation performed.
(3) Proposals shall be submitted to the Contracting Officer or ACO as expeditiously as possible, but not later than
[fill-in]
____ calendar days, after receipt of a written change order by the Contracting Officer.
(4) Proposals shall be signed by each subcontractor participating in the change.
(5) The Contracting Officer will consider issuing a settlement by determination to the contract if the Contractor’s proposal required by paragraph (3) is not received within 30 calendar days, or if agreement has not been reached.
(b) Paragraphs (a)(1) through (5) and the following apply to proposed contract changes costing $500,000 or less:
(1) As a basis for negotiation, allowances not to exceed 10 percent each for overhead and profit for the party performing the work will be based on the value of labor, material, and equipment required to accomplish the change. As the value of the change increases, a declining scale will also be used in negotiating the percentage of overhead and profit. This declining scale will also be used to negotiate the prime Contractor’s or upper-tier subcontractor’s fee when work is performed by lower-tier subcontractors (to a maximum of three tiers) and will be based on the net increased cost to the prime or upper-tier subcontractor, as applicable. Profit (fee) shall be computed by multiplying the profit percentage by the sum of the direct costs and computed overhead costs. Allowable percentages on changes will not exceed the following:
(i) 10 percent overhead and/or 10 percent profit (fee) on the first $20,000;
(ii) 7.5 percent overhead and/or 7.5 percent profit (fee) on the next $30,000;
(iii) 5 percent overhead and/or 5 percent profit (fee) on a balance over $50,000.
(2) The Contracting Officer will consider issuing a settlement by determination to the contract if the Contractor’s proposal required by paragraph (3) is not received within 30 calendar days, or if agreement has not been reached.
(c)(1) Overhead and Contractor’s fee percentages shall be considered to include insurance other than mentioned herein, field and office supervisors and assistants, security policy, use of small tools, incidental job burdens, and general home office expenses and no separate allowance will be made. Assistants to office supervisors include all clerical, stenographic and general office help. Incidental job burdens include, but are not necessarily limited to, office equipment and supplies, temporary toilets, telephone and conformance to OSHA requirements. Items such as, but not necessarily limited to, review and coordination, estimating and expediting relative to contract changes are associated with field and office supervision and are considered to be included in the Contractor’s overhead and/or fee percentage.
(2) Where the Contractor’s or subcontractor’s portion of a change involves credit items, such items must be deducted prior to adding overhead and profit for the party performing the work. The Contractor’s fee is limited to the net increase to Contractor or subcontractor’s portions of cost computed in accordance with this clause.
(3) Where a change involves credit items only, a proper measure of the amount of downward adjustment in the contract price is the reasonable cost to the Contractor if it had performed the deleted work. A reasonable allowance for overhead and profit are properly includable as part of the downward adjustment for a deductive change. The amount of such allowance is subject to negotiation.
(End of clause)
852.246-70  [Reserved]
852.246-71  Rejected Goods.
As prescribed in
846.370-1
, insert the following clause:
REJECTED GOODS (OCT 2018)
(a)
Supplies and equipment.
Rejected goods will be held subject to Contractor’s order for not more than 15 days, after which the rejected merchandise will be returned to the Contractor’s address at the Contractor’s risk and expense.  Expenses incident to the examination and testing of materials or supplies that have been rejected will be charged to the Contractor.
(b)
Perishable supplies.
The Contractor shall remove rejected perishable supplies within 48 hours after notice of rejection.  Supplies determined to be unfit for human consumption will not be removed without permission of the local health authorities.  Supplies not removed within the allowed time may be destroyed.  The Department of Veterans Affairs will not be responsible for, nor pay for, products rejected.  The Contractor will be liable for costs incident to examination of rejected products.
(End of clause)
852.246-72  Frozen Processed Foods.
As prescribed in
846.370-2
, insert the following clause:
FROZEN PROCESSED FOODS (OCT 2018)
The products delivered under this contract shall be in excellent condition, shall not show evidence of defrosting, refreezing, or freezer burn and shall be transported and delivered to the consignee at a temperature of 0 degrees Fahrenheit or lower.
(End of clause)
852.246-73  Noncompliance with Packaging, Packing, and/or Marking Requirements.
As prescribed in
846.370-3
, insert the following clause:
NONCOMPLIANCE WITH PACKAGING, PACKING AND/OR MARKING REQUIREMENTS (OCT 2018)
Failure to comply with the packaging, packing and/or marking requirements indicated herein, or incorporated herein by reference, may result in rejection of the merchandise and request for replacement or repackaging, repacking, and/or marking.  The Government reserves the right, without obtaining authority from the contractor, to perform the required repackaging, repacking, and/or marking services and charge the contractor at the actual cost to the Government for the same or have the required repackaging, repacking, and/or marking services performed commercially under Government order and charge the contractor at the invoice rate.  In connection with any discount offered, time will be computed from the date of completion of such repackaging, repacking and/or marking services.
(End of clause)
852.246-74  [Reserved]
852.246-75  Warranty of Construction–Guarantee Period Services.
As prescribed in
846.702-70(e)
, insert the following clause:
WARRANTY OF CONSTRUCTION–GUARANTEE PERIOD SERVICES (OCT 2018)
The clause
52.246-21
, Warranty of Construction, is supplemented as follows:
Should the contractor fail to complete the work or fail to proceed promptly to provide guarantee period services after notification by the Contracting Officer, the Government may, subject to the default clause contained at
FAR 52.249-10, Default (Fixed-Price Construction)
, and after allowing the Contractor 10 days to correct and comply with the contract, terminate the right to proceed with the work (or the separable part of the work) that has been delayed or unsatisfactorily performed.  In this event, the Government may take over the work and complete it by contract or otherwise, and may take possession of and use any materials, appliances, and plant on the work site necessary for completing the work.  The Contractor and its sureties shall be liable for any damages to the Government resulting from the Contractor’s refusal or failure to complete the work within this specified time, whether or not the Contractor’s right to proceed with the work is terminated.  This liability includes any increased costs incurred by the Government in completing the work.
(End of clause)
852.246-76  Purchase of Shellfish.
As prescribed in
846.370-4
, insert the following clause:
PURCHASE OF SHELLFISH (OCT 2018)
The supplier certifies that oysters, clams, and mussels will be furnished only from plants approved by and operated under the supervision of shellfish authorities of States whose certifications are endorsed currently by the U.S. Public Health Service, and the names and certificate numbers of those shellfish dealers must appear on current lists published by the U.S. Public Health Service.  These items shall be packed and delivered in approved containers, sealed in such manner that tampering is easily discernible, and marked with packer’s certificate number impressed or embossed on the side of such containers and preceded by the State abbreviation.  Containers shall be tagged or labeled to show the name and address of the approved producer or shipper, the name of the State of origin, and the certificate number of the approved producer or shipper.
(End of clause)
852.247-70  Determining Transportation Costs for Evaluation of Offers.
As prescribed in
847.305-70
, insert the following provision:
DETERMINING TRANSPORTATION COSTS FOR EVALUATION OF OFFERS (OCT 2018)
For the purpose of evaluating bids and for no other purpose, the delivered price per unit will be determined by adding the nationwide average transportation charge to the f.o.b. origin bid prices.  The nationwide average transportation charge will be determined by applying the following formula:Multiply the guaranteed shipping weight by the freight, parcel post, or express rate, whichever is proper, to each destination shown below and then multiply the resulting transportation charges by the anticipated demand factor shown for each destination.  Total the resulting weighted transportation charges for all destinations and divide the total by 20 to give the nationwide average transportation charge.
Anticpated demand
Area destination
Factor
Oakland, California
3
Dallas, Texas
2
Omaha, Nebraska
3
Fort Wayne, Indiana
4
Atlanta, Georgia
3
New York, New York
5
Total of factors
20
(End of provision)
852.247-71  Delivery Location.
As prescribed in
847.302
, insert a clause substantially the same as:
DELIVERY LOCATION (OCT 2018)
Shipment of deliverable items, other than reports, shall be to:  ________ [
Contracting Officer shall insert appropriate identifying data
].
(End of clause)
852.247-72  Marking Deliverables.
As prescribed in
847.305-10(a)
, insert a clause substantially the same as:
MARKING DELIVERABLES (OCT 2018)
(a) The contract number shall be placed on or adjacent to all exterior mailing or shipping labels of deliverable items called for by the contract.
(b) Mark deliverables, except reports, for:  _______ [
Contracting Officer shall insert appropriate identifying data
].
(End of clause)
852.247-73  Packing for Domestic Shipment.
As prescribed in
847.305-10(b)
, insert the following clause:
PACKING FOR DOMESTIC SHIPMENT (OCT 2018)
Material shall be packed for shipment in such a manner that will insure acceptance by common carriers and safe delivery at destination.  Containers and closures shall comply with regulations of carriers as applicable to the mode of transportation.
(End of clause)
852.247-74  Advance Notice of Shipment.
As prescribed in
847.305-71(a)
, insert the following clause:
ADVANCE NOTICE OF SHIPMENT (OCT 2018)
_____ [
Insert number of work days
] work days prior to shipping item(s) ______ [
Insert items to be shipped
], the Contractor shall furnish the anticipated shipment date, bill of lading number (if applicable), and carrier identity to __________ [
Insert individual(s) to receive notification
] and to the Contracting Officer.
(End of clause)
852.247-75  Bills of Lading.
As prescribed in
847.305-71(b)
, insert the following clause:
BILLS OF LADING (OCT 2018)
The purpose of this clause is to define when a commercial bill of lading or a Government bill of lading is to be used when shipments of deliverable items under this contract are f.o.b. origin.
(a)
Commercial bills of lading.
All domestic shipments shall be made via commercial bills of lading (CBLs).  The Contractor shall prepay domestic transportation charges.  The Government shall reimburse the Contractor for these charges if they are added to the invoice as a separate line item supported by the paid freight receipts.  If paid receipts in support of the invoice are not obtainable, a statement as described below must be completed, signed by an authorized company representative, and attached to the invoice.
“I certify that the shipments identified below have been made, transportation charges have been paid by [
company name
], and paid freight or comparable receipts are not obtainable.
Contract or Order Number: ___________
Destination:____________.”
(b)
Government bills of lading.
(1) International (export) and domestic overseas shipments of items deliverable under this contract shall be made by Government bills of lading (GBLs).  As used in this clause, “domestic overseas” means non-continental United States, i.e. Hawaii, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and possessions of the United States.
(2) At least 15 days before shipment, the Contractor shall request in writing GBLs from:  ________ [
Insert name, title, and mailing address of designated transportation officer or other official delegated responsibility for GBLs
].  If time is limited, requests may be by telephone:  ________ [
Insert appropriate telephone number
].  Requests for GBLs shall include the following information.
(i) Item identification/ description.
(ii) Origin and destination.
(iii) Individual and total weights.
(iv) Dimensional Weight.
(v) Dimensions and total cubic footage.
(vi) Total number of pieces.
(vii) Total dollar value.
(viii) Other pertinent data.
(End of clause)
852.249-70  Termination for Default–Supplement for Mortuary Services.
As prescribed in
849.504-70
, insert the following clause:
TERMINATION FOR DEFAULT—SUPPLEMENT FOR MORTUARY SERVICES (MAY 2020)
The FAR clause entitled “Default (Fixed-Price Supply and Service)” at
FAR 52.249-8
, is supplemented as follows:
The Contracting Officer may terminate this contract for default by written notice without the ten-day notice required by paragraph (a)(2) of the Default clause if—
(a) The Contractor, through circumstances reasonably within its control or that of its employees, performs any act under or in connection with this contract, or fails in the performance of any service under this contract and the act or failures may reasonably be considered to reflect discredit upon the Department of Veteran Affairs in fulfilling its responsibility for proper care of remains;
(b) The Contractor, or its employees, solicits relatives or friends of the deceased to purchase supplies or services not under this contract. (The Contractor may furnish supplies or arrange for services not under this contract, only if representatives of the deceased voluntarily request, select, and pay for them.);
(c) The services or any part of the services are performed by anyone other than the Contractor or the Contractor’s employees without the written authorization of the Contracting Officer;
(d) The Contractor refuses to perform the services required for any particular remains; or
(e) The Contractor mentions or otherwise uses this contract in its advertising in any way.
(End of clause)
852.252-70  Solicitation Provisions or Clauses Incorporated by Reference.
As prescribed in
852.102(a)
, insert the following provision:
SOLICITATION PROVISIONS OR CLAUSES INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE (JAN 2008)
The following provisions or clauses incorporated by reference in this solicitation must be completed by the offeror or prospective contractor and submitted with the quotation or offer.  Copies of these provisions or clauses are available on the Internet at the web sites provided in the provision at
FAR 52.252-1
, Solicitation Provisions Incorporated by Reference, or the clause at
FAR 52.252-2
, Clauses Incorporated by Reference.  Copies may also be obtained from the contracting officer.
[
Contracting officer shall list all FAR and 48 CFR Chapter 8 (VAAR) provisions and clauses incorporated by reference that must be completed by the offeror or prospective contractor and submitted with the quotation or offer.
]
(End of provision)
852.270-2 through 852.270-3  [Reserved]
852.271-70 and 852.271-71  [Reserved]
852.271-72  Time Spent by Counselee in Counseling Process.
As prescribed in
871.210(a)(1)
, insert the following clause:
TIME SPENT BY COUNSELEE IN COUNSELING PROCESS (NOV 2021)
The Contractor agrees that no counselee referred under the provisions of this agreement will be required to participate or engage in additional sessions or expend any extra time in connection with the counseling process, to supply test results or other information, for purposes other than those specified in this contract.
(End of clause)
852.271-73  Use and Publication of Counseling Results.
As prescribed in
871.210(a)(2)
, insert the following clause:
USE AND PUBLICATION OF COUNSELING RESULTS (NOV 2021)
The Contractor agrees that none of the information or data gathered in connection with the services specified in this contract, or studies or materials based thereon or relating thereto, will be publicized without the prior approval of the Under Secretary for Benefits or his/her designee.
(End of clause)
852.271-74  Inspection of Instruction, Counseling or Testing Operations.
As prescribed in
871.210(a)(3)
, insert the following clause:
INSPECTION OF INSTRUCTION, COUNSELING OR TESTING OPERATIONS (NOV 2021)
The Contractor will permit the duly authorized representative of the Department of Veterans Affairs to visit the place of instruction or the counseling and testing operations as may be necessary and to examine the training facilities, the work of the Veterans in training under this contract, and the records of these operations, along with any other rights to examine records and conduct inspections in accordance with the Federal Acquisition Regulation and clauses contained in the contract or order.
(End of clause)
852.271-75  [Reserved]
852.273-70  Late Offers.
As prescribed in
873.110(a)
, insert the following provision:
LATE OFFERS (NOV 2021)
This provision replaces paragraph (f) of
FAR provision 52.212-1
, Instructions to Offerors—Commercial Items.  Offers or modifications of offers received after the time set forth in a request for quotations or request for proposals may be considered, at the discretion of the contracting officer, if determined to be in the best interest of the Government.  Late bids submitted in response to an invitation for bid (IFB) will not be considered.
(End of provision)
852.273-71  Alternative Negotiation Techniques.
As prescribed in
873.110(b)
, insert the following provision:
ALTERNATIVE NEGOTIATION TECHNIQUES (NOV 2021)
The contracting officer may elect to use the alternative negotiation techniques described in
section 873.111(d)
of 48 Code of Federal Regulations Chapter 8 in conducting this procurement.  If used, offerors may respond by maintaining offers as originally submitted, revising offers, or submitting an alternative offer.  The Government may consider initial offers unless revised or withdrawn, revised offers, and alternative offers in making the award.  Revising an offer does not guarantee an offeror an award.
(End of provision)
852.273-72  Alternative Evaluation.
As prescribed in
873.110(c)
, insert the following provision:
ALTERNATIVE EVALUATION (JAN 2003)
(a) The Government will award a contract resulting from this solicitation to the responsible offeror submitting the lowest priced offer that conforms to the solicitation.During the specified period for receipt of offers, the amount of the lowest offer will be posted and may be viewed by [
Contracting officer insert description of how the information may be viewed electronically or otherwise
].  Offerors may revise offers anytime during the specified period.  At the end of the specified time period for receipt of offers, the responsible offeror submitting the lowest priced offer will be in line for award.
(b) Except when it is determined not to be in the Government’s best interest, the Government will evaluate offers for award purposes by adding the total price for all options to the total price for the basic requirement.  The Government may determine that an offer is unacceptable if the option prices are materially unbalanced.  Evaluation of options shall not obligate the Government to exercise the option(s).
(End of provision)
852.273-73  Evaluation - Health-Care Resources.
As prescribed in
873.110(d)
, in lieu of
FAR provision 52.212-2
, the Contracting Officer may insert a provision substantially as follows:
EVALUATION - HEALTH-CARE RESOURCES (NOV 2021)
(a) The Government will award a contract resulting from this solicitation to the responsible offeror whose offer, conforming to the solicitation, will be most advantageous to the Government, price and other factors considered.  The following information or factors shall be used to evaluate offers: [
Contracting officer insert evaluation information or factors, such as technical capability to meet the Government's requirements, past performance, or such other evaluation information or factors as the contracting officer deems necessary to evaluate offers.  Price must be evaluated in every acquisition.  The contracting officer may include the evaluation information or factors in their relative order of importance, such as in descending order of importance.  The relative importance of any evaluation information must be stated in the solicitation.
]
(b) Except when it is determined not to be in the Government’s best interest, the Government will evaluate offers for award purposes by adding the total price for all options to the total price for the basic requirement.  The Government may determine that an offer is unacceptable if the option prices are materially unbalanced.  Evaluation of options shall not obligate the Government to exercise the option(s).
(c) If this solicitation is a request for proposals (RFP), a written notice of award or acceptance of an offer, mailed or otherwise furnished to the successful offeror within the time for acceptance specified in the offer, shall result in a binding contract without further action by either party.  Before the offer’s specified expiration time, the Government may accept an offer (or part of an offer), whether or not there are negotiations after its receipt, unless a written notice of withdrawal is received before award.
(End of provision)
852.273-74  Award Without Exchanges.
As prescribed in
873.110(e)
, insert the following provision:
AWARD WITHOUT EXCHANGES (NOV 2021)
The Government intends to evaluate proposals and award a contract without exchanges with offerors.  Therefore, each initial offer should contain the offeror’s best terms from a cost or price and technical standpoint.  However, the Government reserves the right to conduct exchanges if later determined by the contracting officer to be necessary.
(End of provision)
X
External Links Disclaimer
This page may contain links to pages and/or documents outside the Department of Veterans Affairs Domain.  These are annotated as shown below.  We hope your visit was informative.
U.S. Federal/Military/State Government Sites — You will leave the Department of Veterans Affairs web site by accessing links annotated with this graphic.
X
External Links Disclaimer
This page may contain links to pages and/or documents outside the Department of Veterans Affairs Domain.  These are annotated as shown below.  We hope your visit was informative.
Non-Government Sites — You will leave the Department of Veterans Affairs web site by accessing links annotated with this graphic.  VA does not endorse and is not responsible for the content of the linked web site.
return to top
CONNECT
Veterans Crisis Line:
Call: 988
(Press 1)
Social Media
Complete Directory
EMAIL UPDATES
Email Address Required
Button to subscribe to email
VA HOME
Notices
Privacy
FOIA
Regulations
Web Policies
No FEAR Act
Whistleblower Rights & Protections
Site Index
USA.gov
White House
Inspector General
QUICK LIST
Apply for Benefits
Apply for Health Care
Prescriptions
My Health
e
Vet
Life Insurance Online Applications
VA Forms
State and Local Resources
Strat Plan FY 2014-2020
VA Plans, Budget, & Performance
VA Claims Representation
RESOURCES
Careers at VA
Employment Center
Returning Service Members
Vocational Rehabilitation & Employment
Homeless Veterans
Women Veterans
Minority Veterans
Plain Language
Surviving Spouses & Dependents
Adaptive Sports Program
ADMINISTRATION
Veterans Health Administration
Veterans Benefits Administration
National Cemetery Administration
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs | 810 Vermont Avenue, NW Washington DC 20420
Last updated April 22, 2025
Get help from Veterans Crisis Line
Call
988 (Press 1)
Text to
838255
Chat
confidentially now
Call TTY if you
          have hearing loss
1-800-799-4889
If you are in crisis or having thoughts of suicide,
	visit
VeteransCrisisLine.net
for more resources.
Close this modal